1. Upper limb deformity in Erb's palsy?
 a) Adduction and lateral rotation of arm

 b) Adduction and medial rotation of arm

 c) Abduction and lateral rotation of arm

 d) Abduction and medial rotation of arm



Correct Answer - B
Deformity in Erb's palsy (position of the limb):
Arm: Hanges by the side; it is adducted & medially rotated
Forearm: Extended and pronated
The deformity is known as ‘policeman’s tip hand' or ‘porter’s tip
hand’
2. Nerve roots involved in Erb's palsy:
 a) C5, C6

 b) C6, C7

 c) C7,C8,T1

 d) C5,C6,C7,C8,T1



Correct Answer - A
Erb-Duchenne Palsy
Upper lesions of the brachial plexus are injuries resulting from
excessive displacement of the head to the opposite side and
depression of the shoulder on the same side. This causes excessive
traction or even tearing of C5 and C6 roots of the plexus. It occurs in
the newborn during a difficult delivery or in adults after a blow to or
fall on the shoulder.
The suprascapular nerve, the nerve to the subclavius, and the
musculocutaneous and axillary nerves all possess nerve fibers
derived from C5 and C6 roots and will therefore be functionless.
The following muscles will consequently be paralyzed: the
supraspinatus (abductor of the shoulder) and infraspinatus (lateral
rotator of the shoulder); the subclavius (depresses the clavicle); the
biceps brachii (supinator of the forearm, flexor of the elbow, weak
flexor of the shoulder) and the greater part of the brachialis (flexor of
the elbow) and the coracobrachialis (flexes the shoulder); and the
deltoid (abductor of the shoulder) and the teres minor (lateral rotator
of the shoulder).
Thus, the limb will hang limply by the side, medially rotated by the
unopposed sternocostal part of the pectoralis major; the forearm will
be pronated because of loss of the action of the biceps.
The position of the upper limb in this condition has been likened to
that of a porter or waiter hinting for a tip. In addition, there will be a
that of a porter or waiter hinting for a tip. In addition, there will be a
loss of sensation down the lateral side of the arm.
Treatment
The three most common treatments from Erb's Palsy are: Nerve
transfers (usually from the opposite leg), subscapularis releases and
latissimus dorsi tendon transfers.
3. Root value of thoracodorsal nerve ?
 a) C5,C6,C7

 b) C8,T1


 c) C6,C7,C8


 d) Ti T2



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., C6C7C8
Branches of brachial plexus
Branches of brachial plexus arises from different anatomical
segments : -
1. Branches of the roots
Nerve to serratus anterior (long thoracic nerve) (C5, C6, C7).
Nerve to rhomboideus (dorsal scapular nerve) (C5).
2. Branches of the trunks
These arise only from the upper trunk which gives two branches. I.
Suprascapular nerve (C5, C6)
Nerve to subclavius (C5, C6)
3. Branches of the cords
1. Branches of lateral cord
Lateral pectoral (C5-C7)
Musculocutaneous (C5-C7)
Lateral root of median (C5-C7)
2. Branches of medial cord
Medial pectoral (C8, T1)
Medial cutaneous nerve of arm (C8, TO
Medial cutaneous nerve of forearm (C8, Ti).
Ulnar (C7, C8, Ti). C7 fibres reach by a communicating branch from
lateral root of median nerve.
Medial root of median (C8, T1).
3. Branches of posterior cord
Upper subscapular (C5, C6)
Nerve to latissimus dorsi (thoracodorsal) (C6, C7, CO
Lower subscapular (C5, C6)
Axillary (circumflex) (C5, C6)
Radial (C5-C8, T1)
4. Teres minor is supplied by
 a) Suprascapular nerve

 b) Infrascapular nerve

 c) Thoracodorsal nerve

 d) Axillary nerve



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is'd'i.e., Axillary nerve [Ref:BDC 6h/e VoI.l p. 671
Axillary nerve supplies teres minor and deltoid.
5. Insertion of levator scapulae is ?
 a) Lateral border of scapula

 b) Suprolateral part of scapula

 c) Superior part of medial scapula border

 d) Inferior angle of scapula



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is'c' i.e., Superior part of medial scapula border
[Ref Rockwood, Charles A.; Matsen, (2009). The shoulder, VoI. 1]
Origin:
* Posterior tubercles of transverse processes of C 1 - C4 vertebrae.
Insertion:
* Superior part of medial border of scapula
6. Number of lobes in breast
 a) 5

 b) 10

 c) 15

 d) 30



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is'c'i.e., 15lRef; BDC tr/eVol.I p. 361
Breast (mammary gland) is a modifeil sweat glaad present in
the superficial fascia of pectoral region.
It consists of 15-20 lobes.
Vertically it extends from 2nd to 6th ribs at midclavicular line
and horizontal extent is from sternal margin to midaxillary line at
the level of 4h rib.
7. Which of the following arises from
   infraglenoid tubercle -
 a) Longheadofbiceps

 b) Longheadoftriceps

 c) Shortheadofbiceps

 d) Coracobrachialis



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is'b' i.e., Long head of triceps
Supraglenoid tubercle of scapula : origin oflong head ofbiceps.
Infraglenoid tubercle of scapula : origin of long head of triceps
8. Not attached on medial border of scapula ?
 a) Serratus anterior

 b) Levator scapulae

 c) Rhamboides major

 d) Teres major



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Teres major
Muscles attached to scapula are :-
Coracoid process :- Tip of the coracoid process gives origin to
coracobrachialis (medially) and short head of the biceps laterally.
The upper surface receives insertion of pectoralis minor.
Spine of scapula and acromion process :- There is origin of Deltoid
and insertion of trapezius.
Glenoid tubercle :- Supraglenoid tubercle gives origin to the long
head of biceps and infra glenoid tubercle gives origin to long head of
triceps.
Lateral border :- Origins of teres minor and teres major.
Medial border :- Insertions of serattus anterior (anteriorly); and
rhomboideus major, rhomboideus minor and levator scapulae
(posteriorly).
Costal (anterior) surface (origin) Subscapularis.
Dorsal surface (origins) Supraspinatus, infraspinatus and at inferior
angle latissimus dorsi.
9. Aroots.
      patient has a herniated intervertebral disc impinging on the right C5 nerve
           Which of the following movements would most likely be affected?

 a) Extension of the fingers

 b) Extension of the shoulder

 c) Flexion of the elbow

 d) Flexion of the wrist



Correct Answer - C
C5 helps mediate flexion, abduction, and lateral rotation of the shoulder, and flexion of the
elbow. Both C5 and C6 mediate extension of the elbow.
Extension of the fingers is mediated by C7 and 8.
Extension of the shoulder is mediated by C7 and 8.
Flexion of the wrist is mediated by C6 and 7.
10. Medial boundry of Cubital fossa ?
 a) Brachioradialis

 b) Pronator teres

 c) Supinator

 d) None



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Pronator teres
11. True about lumbricals is
 a) Flex IP joints and extends MCP joint

 b) 1st and 2nd supplied by radial nerve

 c) 3 and 4 supplied by superficial branch of ulnar

 d) Origin from tendons of flexor digitorum profundus



Correct Answer - D
Answer. D
Origin from tendons of flexor digitorum profundus*
The four lumbrical muscles arise from the tendons of flexor
digitorum profundus. They have different origins:
Each passes distally to the radial side of its nearest
metacarpophalangeal joint of the fingers to be inserted into
the dorsal extensor expansionof digits two to five.
Their actions on these digits are to:
* Extend the interphalangeal joints
* Flex the metacarpophalangeal joints
The innervation of the lumbricals is dual:
* The radial first and second lumbricals are supplied by
the median nerve (C8, T1)
* The ulnar third and fourth lumbricals are supplied by the deep
branch of the ulnar nerve (C8, T1)
* Occasionally, the third lumbrical can receive its innervation from
the median nerve.
12. Lateral boundary of cubital fossa is
    formed by:
 a) Brachioradialis

 b) Pronator teres

 c) Brachialis

 d) Biceps



Correct Answer - A
Brachioradialis
Boundaries of cubital fossa-
Laterally - Medial border of brachioradialis.
Medially - Lateral border of pronator teres.
Base - It is directed upwards, and is represented by an imaginary
line joining the front of two epicondyles of the humerus.
Apex - It is directed downwards, and is formed by the area where
brachioradialis crosses the pronator teres muscle.
13. Muscle of Arm with additional supinator
    action?
 a) Brachialis

 b) Biceps

 c) Coracobrachialis

 d) Triceps



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Biceps
14. The nerve supply of nail bed of index
    finger is ?
 a) Superficial br of radial nerve

 b) Deep br of radial nerve

 c) Median nerve

 d) Ulnar nerve



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Median nerve
15. Content of anatomical snuffbox
a) Radial artery

b) Brachial artery

c) Ulnar artery

d) Interosseus artery



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Radial artery [Ref: AK Dutta p. 861]
 Triangular depression on the dorsal and radial aspect of the
hand become visible when thumb is fully extended.
Boundaries
Media/Posterior → Tendon of the extensor pollicis longus.
Lateral/Anterior → tendon of the extensor pollicis brevis and
abductor pollicis longus,
Roof → Skin and fascia with beginning of cephalic vein and
crossed by superficial branch of the radial nerve
Floor → Styloid process of radius, trapezium, scaphoid and base
of first metacarpal
Contents → The radial artery
16. 3rd extensor compartment of wrist
    contains tendon of ?
 a) ECRL

 b) ECRB

 c) EPL

 d) EPB



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C) EPL
The third compartment contains the extensor pollicis
longus tendon, which originates at the mid-ulna and inserts at the
base of the first distal phalanx.
In combination with the EPB tendon, it extends the thumb at the first
carpometacarpal and first interphalangeal joints.
17. Which leaves the pelvis ?
 a) Piriformis

 b) Sciatic nerve

 c) Superior gluteal vessel

 d) Inferior gluteal vessel



Correct Answer - B
Sciatic nerve leaves the pelvis and runs posteriorly in the thigh.
In the upper angle of popliteal fossa, sciatic nerve divides into tibial
nerve and common peroneal nerve
18. Abduction and adduction of foot occurs at
    which joints
 a) Ankle

 b) Subtalar

 c) Tarso-metatarsal

 d) None



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is'b'i.e., Subtalar [Ret Clinical arthopaedics p. 7861
Adduction and abduction of foot occurs mainly at subtalar joint.
Movements take place at ankle are dorsiflexion and
plantarflexion.
Inversion and eversion take place at Subtalar joint and midtarsal
joints.
19. All are true about femoral triangle, EXCEPT?
 a) Lateral margin is formed by sartorius

 b) Floor is formed by adductor longus

 c) Contains the femoral vessels

 d) None of the above



Correct Answer - D
All are true about the femoral triangle
The femoral triangle is a depressed area of the thigh lying distal to
the inguinal fold.
Its apex is distal, its limits are the medial margin of sartorius laterally,
the medial margin of adductor longus medially and the inguinal
ligament proximally (the base).
Its floor is provided laterally by iliacus and psoas major, medially by
pectineus and adductor longus.
The femoral vessels, passing from mid base to apex, are in the
deepest part of the triangle. Lateral to the artery the femoral nerve
divides.
The triangle also contains fat and lymph nodes.
20. Content of femoral canal
 a) Femoral branch of genitofemoral nerve

 b) Genital branch of genitofemoral nerve

 c) Femoral vein

 d) Lymph node



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is'd'i.e., Lymph node [Ref BDC 5th/e VoI.2 p. 53, 54]
Femoral sheath is a funnel shaped fascial prolongation around
proximal part of femoral vessels, situated in the femoral triangle,
below the inguinal ligament. It is 3-4 cm long. lt is formed by
fascia iliaca.
Femoral ring b bounded: Anteriorly by inguinal ligament, medially
by the lacunar ligament, posterior / by pectineus with its covering
fascia, and laterally by septum separating it from femoral vein.
Femoral canal contains lymph node of cloquet or Rosenmuller
and lymphatics.
21. A patient presents with defective
    adduction of the hip joint and pains in the
    hip and knee joint. Which nerve is
    involved
 a) Obturator nerve

 b) Femoral nerve

 c) Saphenous nerve

 d) Sciatic nerve



Correct Answer - A
A. i.e. Obturator nerve
Adductors of thigh are mainly supplied by obturator nerveQ.
A disease in hip joint may cause referred pain in knee & medial thigh
because of their common nerve supply by obturator nerveQ.
22. Structure which lies outside the femoral
    sheath
 a) Femoral artery

 b) Femoral nerve

 c) Femoral vein

 d) Genitofemoral nerve



Correct Answer - B
Femoral nerve
Femoral sheath
Femoral sheath is a funnel shaped fascial prolongation around
proximal part of femoral vessels, situated in the femoral triangle,
below the inguinal ligament. It is 3-4 cm long. It is formed by fascia
iliaca.
Femoral sheath is divided into 3 separate fascial compartements by
septa :?
Lateral compartment :- It contains femoral artery and femoral
branch of genitofemoral nerve.
Intermediate compartment :- Femoral vein.
Medial compartment (femoral canal) :- It is conical in shape, wider
above adn narrow below. The wider upper opening is known
as femoral ring, which is potentially a weak point in lower abdomen
and is the site for femoral hernia. Femoral ring is bounded
: Anteriorly by inguinal ligament, medially by lacunar
ligament, posteriorly by pectineus with its covering fascia,
and laterally by septum separating it from femoral vein. Femoral
canal contains lymph node of cloquet or Rosenmuller and
lymphatics.
23. Most common ligament damaged in knee
    injury is
a) ACL

b) PCL

c) MCL

d) LCL



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., MCL [lRef; Textbook of sports medicine &/e p.
l38l]
Most commonly injured ligament in knee -+ Medial collateral
ligament (MCL).
MCL tear is the most common knee ligament injury"
MCL injury is the most common ligament injury to the knee"
Practical orthopaedics sports medicine
MCL is the most commonly injured knee ligament"
ACL is the 2nd most commonly injured knee ligament, almost as
frequent as MCL.
24. Which structure(s) passes behind the
    inguinal ligament:
 a) Femoral branch of genitofemoral nerve

 b) Femoral vein

 c) Psoas major

 d) All



Correct Answer - D
A i.e. Femoral branch of genitofemoral nerve; B i.e. Femoral vein ; C
i.e. Psoas major
25. Lateral border of ischeorectal fossa is
    formed by?
 a) Gluteus maximus

 b) Perineal membrane

 c) Pelvic diaphram

 d) Obturator internus



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Obturator internus
Boundries of ischeoanal (ischeorectal) fossa are :-
Anteriorly :- Posterior border of perineal membrane .
Posteriorly :- Gluteus maximus muscle, sacrotuberous ligament.
Laterally :- Ischial tuberosity and obturator internus.
Medially :- Sphincter ani externus (external anal sphincter) and
pelvic diaphragm (levator ani).
26. Arterial branches which supply the head
    and neck of the femur is/are:
 a) Medial circumflex artery

 b) Lateral circumflex artery

 c) Profunda femoris artery

 d) All



Correct Answer - D
A. i.e. Medial circumflex artery; B. i.e. Lateral circumflex artery; C.
i.e. Profunda femoris artery
Proximal femur (head & neck) is supplied by artery of ligamentum
teres (branch of obturator artery), medial (main) & lateral circumflex
femoral artery (both arise from profunda femoris artery, give rise to
ascending cervical (+ metaphyseal) and retinacular (+
epiphyseal:lateral & inferior) arteries and form extracapsular &
intracapsular​ subsynovial arterial rings
   27. Femoral nerve supplies all except ?
    a) Pectineus

    b) Sartorius

    c) Vastus medialis

    d) Obturator externus



   Correct Answer - D
   Branches of femoral nerve are :?
1. From the main trunk :- Nerve supply to iliacus, nerve supply to
   pectineus and a few vascular branches.
2. From anterior division :- Intermediate femoral cutaneous nerve
   (intermediate cutaneous nerve of thigh), medial femoral cutaneous
   nerve (medial cutaneous nerve of thigh) and muscular branch to
   sartorius.
3. From posteior division :- Saphenous nerve, nerve supply to
   quadriceps femoris (rectus femoris, vastus medialis, vastus lateralis,
   vastus intermedius).
4. Articular supply :- Hip joint is supplied by nerve to rectus femoris;
   knee joint is supplied by nerve to three vasti.
28. Superior gluteal nerve does not supply ?
 a) Tensor fasciae latae

 b) Gluteus medius

 c) Gluteus minimus

 d) Gluteus maximus



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Gluteus maximus
Nerve supplying muscles of gluteal region are :-
Inferior gluteal nerve : Gluteus maximus.
Superior gluteal nerve : Gluteus medius and minimus.
Nerve to piriformis : Piriformis
Nerve to obturator internus : Obturator internus, Gemellus superior.
Nerve to quadratus femoris : Quadratus femoris, Gemellus inferior.
Tensor fascia latae is supplied by superior gluteal nerve.
29. What is true about adductors of thigh –
 a) Ischial head of adductor magnus is an adductor

 b) Profunda femoris artery is the main blood supply

 c) Ischial head of adductor magnus originates from adductor
    tubercle

 d) Adductor magnus is the largest muscle



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is'd'i.e., Adductor magnus is the largest muscle
Ischial head of adductor magnus is a hamstring muscle (not
adductor).
Ischial head of adductor magnus originates from inferolateral aspect
of Ischial tuberosity (not from adductor tubercle).
Main artery of adductor (medial) compartment of thigh is obturator
artery (not profunda femoris).
Adductor magnus is the largest muscle of the adductor
compartment.
30.
A nerve injured in radical neck dissection
leads to loss of sensation in medial side of
the arm, nerve injured is?
 a) Long thoracic nerve

 b) Thoracodorsal nerve

 c) Dorsal scapular nerve

 d) Medial cutaneous nerve of arm



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Medial cutaneous nerve of arm
The medial cutaneous nerve of the arm is the smallest and most
medial branch of he brachial plexus, and arises from the medial
cord.
It pierces the deep fascia at the midpoint of the upper arm to supply
the skin over the medial aspect of the distal third of the upper arm.
31. Secondary ossification center for lower
    end of femur?
 a) Present at birth

 b) Appears at 6 months of age

 c) Appears at 1 year of age

 d) Appears at 5 years of age



Correct Answer - A
Secondary center of lower end of femur appears at 9th month of
intrauterine life (present at birth).
Ossification of femur
The femur ossifies from one primary and four secondary centres.
The primary centre for the shaft appears in the seventh week of
intrauterine life. The secondary centres appear, one for the lower
end at the end of the ninth month of intrauterine life, one for the
head during the first six months of life, one for the greater trochanter
during the fourth year, and one for the lesser trochanter during the
twelfth year.
There are three epiphyses at the upper end and one epiphysis at the
lower end. The upper epiphyses; lesser trochanter, greater
trochanter and head, in that order, fuse with the shaft at about
eighteen years. The lower epiphysis fuses by the twentieth year.
32. Which of the following prevents
    hyperextension of thigh
 a) Ischiofemoral ligament

 b) Iliofemoral ligament

 c) Patellofemoral ligament

 d) Puboischial ligament



Correct Answer - B
B. i.e. Iliofemoral ligament
Hip extension is limited by the iliofemoral ligament, which passes
over the front of the hip joint and connects the ilium (hip bone) to the
femur (thigh bone).
This ligament elongates when the pelvis is tilted backwards,
restricting the distance the joint can be extended.
The iliofemoral ligament also limits external (outward) rotation of the
hip joint when flexed, and it restrains both internal (inward) and
external rotation when the joint is extended
33. Lower limit of superior mediastinum is at
    which level -
 a) Ti


 b) T1

 c) T8


 d) T10



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., T1 [Ref. BDC &/e vol.l p. 245]
Mediastinum is intrapleural space bounded on either side by
mediastinal pleura, anteriorly by sternum and posteriorly by
thoracic vertebral column.
It is divided into superior and inferior mediastinum by a line
passing through sternal angle and lower border ofTnvertebra.
34. Azygous vein drains into:
 a) Right subcostal vein

 b) Superior vena cava

 c) Braciocephalic

 d) Right ascending lumbar vein



Correct Answer - B
The origin of the azygos vein is variable. It is often formed by the
union of the right ascending lumbar vein and the right subcostal
vein.
It ascends through the aortic opening in the diaphragm on the right
side of the aorta to the level of the fifth thoracic vertebra.
Here it arches forward above the root of the right lung to empty into
the posterior surface of the superior vena cava. The azygos vein has
numerous tributaries, including the fifth to eleventh right posterior
intercostal veins, the right superior intercostal vein, the hemiazygos
and the accessory hemiazygos veins, and numerous esophageal,
mediastinal and pericardial veins.
35. Arch of aorta begins and ends at which
    level:
 a) T2

 b) T3

 c) T4

 d) T5



Correct Answer - C
The arch of the aorta (Transverse Aorta) begins at the level of the
upper border of the second sternocostal articulation of the right side,
and runs at first upward, backward, and to the left in front of the
trachea; it is then directed backward on the left side of the trachea
and finally passes downward on the left side of the body of the fourth
thoracic vertebra, at the lower border of which it becomes
continuous with the descending aorta.
36. Which among the following is NOT a branch of Arch of Aorta?
 a) Brachiocephalic

 b) Right common carotid

 c) Left common carotid

 d) Left Subclavian



Correct Answer - B
The arch of the aorta begins at the level of the upper border of the second sternocostal
articulation of the right side. The branches given off from the arch of the aorta are three in
number: the brachiocephalic artery (innominate), the left common carotid, and the left
subclavian.
Brachiocephalic Artery is the largest branch of the arch of the aorta. It divides into the right
common carotid and right subclavian arteries.
37. Which  of the following represent the commonest variation in the arteries
    arising from the arch of aorta?

 a) Absence of brachiocephalic trunk

 b) Left vertebral artery arising from the arch

 c) Presence of retroesophageal subclavian artery

 d) Left common carotid artery arising from brachiocephalic trunk



Correct Answer - D
Most common anomaly of the aortic arch seen in 10-20% individuals is characterized by the
origin of the left common carotid artery from the brachiocephalic (innominate) trunk.

Other common anomalies include: A four vessel arch with separate origins for the right
common carotid and right subclavian arteries (2.5%), Origin of the left vertebral artery
directly from a four vessel aortic arch typically between the ostia of the left common carotid
and subclavian arteries ( 2.4- 5.8%).
38. Intercostal nerve is a branch of ?
 a) Brachial plexus

 b) Dorsal rami of thoracic spinal nerves

 c) Ventral rami of thoracic spinal nerves

 d) Ventral rami of cervical spinal nerves



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Ventral rami of thoracic spinal nerves
Ventral rami of upper 11th thoracic spinal nerves are known as
intercostal nerves and ventral ramus of T12 is known as subcostal
nerve.
Upper six intercostal nerves supply thoracic wall whereas lower five
intercostal nerves and subcostal nerve supply thoracic and anterior
abdominal walls and hence known as thoracoabdominal nerves.
Upper two intercostal nerves also supply the upper limb.
Thus only 3rd to 6th are called typical intercostal nerves.
39. Distance of cricopharynx from incisor
    teeth
 a) 15 cm

 b) 22.5 cm

 c) 27.5 cm

 d) 40 cm



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is'a'i.e., 15 cm [Ref- BDC Sn/e Vol.l p. 269]
Cricopharynx is at the level of pharyngo-esophageal junction i.e.
beginning of esophagus. Its distance is 15 cm (6 inches) from
incisor.
Cardiac end is lower end of esophagus which is at 40 cm from
incisors.
40.
Anterior part of interventricular septum is
supplied by -
 a) Right coronary artery

 b) Left coronary artery

 c) Posterior descending coronary artery

 d) None



Correct Answer - B
Anterior 2/3rd of septum is supplied by LCA and posterior 1/3rd is by
RCA
41. All veins open in sinus venarum except -
 a) SVC

 b) Coronary sinus

 c) Anterior cardiac vein

 d) Small cardiac vein



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is'd'i.e., Small cardiac vein [Ref: Gray's 38e/e p. 14791
Small cardiac vein does not open into sinus venarum
(Posterior smooth part of right atrium).
42. True about atrioventricular groove are all
    except ?
 a) Contains left anterior descending coronary artery

 b) Also called coronary sulcus

 c) Contains right coronary artery

 d) Contains circumflex branch of left coronary artery



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Contains left anterior descending coronary artery
Grooves (sulci) of heart
A) Atrioventricular groove
Atria are separated by ventricles by atrioventricular Sulcus
(atrioventricular groove, also called coronary sulcus).
It is divided into anterior and posterior parts. The right half of anterior
part is large and lodges right coronary artery. Left half of anterior
part is small and lodges circumflex branch of left coronary artery.
B) Interventricular grooves
Right and left ventricles are separated by interventricular grooves.
Anterior interventricular groove is nearer to left margin of heart and
contains anterior interventricular artery (also called left anterior
descending artery).
Posterior interventricular groove is situated on diaphragmatic
(inferior) surface. It contains posterior interventricular artery
(continuation of RCA).
43. Which vein is found at the apex of the
    heart ?
 a) Great cardiac vein

 b) Coronary Sinus

 c) Anterior cardiac vein

 d) Middle cardiac vein



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is'a'i.e., Great cardiac vein
[Rel BDC 4n/e VoI. I p. 251-252; Keith Moore 4e/e p. 136-137;
Snell's 9/e p. 1211
Great Cardiac Vein:
The great cardiac vein (left coronary vein) begins at the apex of
heart and ascends along the anterior longitudinal sulcus to the base
of ventricle.
44. Which of the following does not directly
    drain into right atrium ?
 a) Great cardiac vein

 b) Anterior cardiac vein

 c) Thebasian vein

 d) Venae cordis minimi



Correct Answer - A
Ans. (A) Great cardiac vein
Great cardiac vein does not directly drain into right atrium. It drains
into coronary sinus, which in turn drains into right atrium.
Veinous drainage of heart
Coronary sinus : Opens into right atrium and has following tributaries
: (i) Great cardiac vein, (ii) Middle cardiac vein, (iii) Posterior vein of
left ventricle, (iv) Small cardiac vein, (v) Oblique vein of left atrium
and (vi) Sometimes right marginal vein.
Anterior cardiac vein : Opens into right atrium.
Venae cardis minimi (thebasian veins) : All these are extremely
small veins in the walls of all the 4 chambers of the heart. They open
directly into the respective chambers. They’re most numerous in the
right atrium.
Right marginal vein : More often opens into right atrium but
sometimes into coronary sinus.
45. Tributary of coronary sinus ?
 a) Anterior cardiac vein

 b) Thebesion vein

 c) Smallest cardiac vein

 d) Great cardiac vein



Correct Answer - D
Ans. (D) Great cardiac vein
Coronary sinus
It opens in the posterior wall of right atrium, in the posterior part of
coronary sulcus.
Itopens in the right atrium between IVC and tricuspid orifices.
Coronary sinus is guarded by Thebesian valve (Thebesian valve
(incomplete semilunar valve) guards the orifice of coronary sinus.)
Tributaries of coronary sinus are :
Great cardiac vein :- Lies in the anterior interventricular groove. Left
marginal vein drains into it.
Middle cardiac vein :- Lies in the posterior interventricular groove.
Posterior vein of left ventricle.
Small cardiac vein :- It lies in the posterior part of coronary sulcus
with RCA. Right marginnal vein may sometimes open into small
cardiac vein, more often, however, right marginal vein opens
directly into right atrium.
Oblique vein of left atrium (vein of marshall) :- It is continuous above
with ligament of IVC. These two structures are embryological
remnants of left common cardinal vein (duct of cuvier).
46. Which are segments of upper lobe of right
    lung ?
 a) Anterior, posterior, media

 b) Lateral, medial, superior

 c) Apical, anterior, posterior

 d) Basal, medial, lateral



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Apical, anterior, posterior
47. What is the uppermost structure in left
    lung hilum?
 a) Pulmonary artery

 b) Pulmonary vein

 c) Bronchial artery

 d) Left mainstem bronchus



Correct Answer - A
A i.e., Pulmonary artery
Arrangement of structures in the hilum is as follows -
l. Anterior to posterior (same on both side) :-(i) Superior
pulmonary (ii) Pulmonary artery, (iii) Bronchus
2. Superior to inferior -vein,

a) Right :- (i) Eparterial bronchus (superior most)' (ii) Pulmonary
artery, iii) Hlparterial bronchus, iv) Inferior pulmonary vein (inferior
most).
b) Left :- (i) Puhnonary artery (superior most), (ii) Primary/Principal
bronchus (iii) Inferior pulmonary vein (inferior most)
48. Lymphatic drainage of ovary?
 a) Deep inguinal

 b) Superficial inguinal

 c) Obturator

 d) Paraaortic



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Para-aortic
Lymphatics of the ovary drain to para-aortic nodes alongside the
origin of the ovarian artery (L2).
49. Which structure does not pass through
    superior thoracic aperture -
a) Right vagus

b) Right brachiocephalic artery

c) Thoracic duct

d) Right recurrent laryngeal nerve



Correct Answer - D
Ans- Ans. is 'd' i.e., Right recurrent laryngeal nerve [Ref-
BDC 6h/e Vol.l p. 192]
Thoracic inlet (superior aperture)
The narrow upper end of the thorax, which is continuous with
the neck is called the inlet of the thorax'
The structure passing through the inlet are : -l. Vkcera:-
Trachea, esophagus, apex of lung with pleura, remains of the
thymus, thoracic duct.
50. Ligamentum arteriosum is derived from:
 a) Ductus arteriosus

 b) Ductus venosus

 c) Ductus utriculosaccularis

 d) Ductus reunions



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A: Ductus arteriosus
The ductus arteriosus represents the distal portion of the sixth left
aortic arch and connects the left pulmonary artery to the beginning
of the descending aorta.
During fetal life, blood passes through it from the pulmonary artery to
the aorta, thus bypassing the lungs.
After birth, it normally constricts, later closes, and becomes the
ligamentum arteriosum.
A persistent patent ductus arteriosus results in high-pressure aortic
blood passing into the pulmonary artery, which raises the pressure
in the pulmonary circulation.
A patent ductus arteriosus is life threatening and should be ligated
and divided surgically.
51. Base of the heart is formed by ?
 a) Right atrium

 b) Right ventricle

 c) Left atrium

 d) Left ventricle



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is `c > a' i.e., Left atrium > Right atrium
Base (posterior surface) is formed mainly by left atrium and partly by
right atrium. It is separated from T5 to T8 vertebrae by pericardium
The apex (the most inferior, anterior, and lateral part as
the heart lies in situ) is located on the midclavicular line, in the fifth
intercostal space. It is formed by the left ventricle.
Anterior (sternocostal) surface is formed mostly by right ventricle
(major) and right auricle and partly by left ventricle and left auricle.
52. Right border of heart is formed by ?
 a) Right ventricle

 b) Right atrium

 c) SVC

 d) IVC



Correct Answer - B
Ans. (B) Right atrium
External features of heart
The heart has following borders and surfaces :-
A) Borders
Right border :- Formed by right atrium.
Left border (obtuse margin):- Formed mainly by left ventricle and
partly by left auricle (in its upper most part).
Inferior border (acute margin):- Formed mainly by right ventricle and
partly by left ventricle near apex.
Upper border :- Mainly by left atrium and partly by right atrium where
SVC enters.
Apex :- Formed by left ventricle.
B) Surfaces
Anterior (sternocostal) surface :- Formed mostly by right ventricle
(major) and right auricle and partly by left ventricle and left auricle.
Inferior (diaphragmatic) surface :- It is formed by left ventricle (left
2/3) and right ventricle (right 1/3). It is traversed by posterior
interventricular groove (PIV) containing PIV branch of RCA.
53. True about anatomy of right ventricle:
 a) TV & PV Share fibrous continuity

 b) More prominent trabeculation

 c) Crista supraventricularis Separate Tricuspid valve & Pulmonary
    valve and Apex trabeculated both

 d) All



Correct Answer - D
All Correct
Right ventricle is situated anteriorlyQ. As the anterior (sternocostal)
surface of heart consists mainly of right ventricleQ with right atrium
on its right and a narrow strip of left ventricle left border. The tip of
left auricular appendage peeps over the to of this border.
54. Sensory supply to tongue is by all, EXCEPT?
 a) Lingual nerve

 b) Vagus nerve

 c) Glossopharyngeal nerve

 d) None of the above



Correct Answer - D
The sensory innervation of the tongue reflects its embryological development.
The nerve of general sensation to the presulcal part is the lingual nerve, which also carries
taste sensation derived from the chorda tympani branch of the facial nerve.
The nerve supplying both general and taste sensation to the postsulcal part is the
glossopharyngeal nerve.
An additional area in the region of the valleculae is supplied by the internal laryngeal branch
of the vagus nerve.
55.
Internal anal sphincter is a apart of:
 a) Puborectalis muscle

 b) Deep perineal muscles

 c) Internal longitudinal fibers

 d) Internal circular fibers



Correct Answer - D
D. i.e. Internal circular fibres
Involuantry internal anal sphincter is formed by thickening of circular
muscle layer (i.e. circular layer of muscularis externa, a smooth
muscle) of upper end (2/3 or 3/4) of anal canal. This sphincter
remains in the state of tonic contraction most of the time to maintain
resting tone or pressures (-90 cm H20) & to prevent leakage of fluid
or flatus. Its contraction (tonus) is maintained by sympathetic fibers
from superior rectal (periarterial) and hypogastric plexuses; and
inhibited (i.e. sphincter relaxed) by parasympathetic pelvic
splanchnic nerves.
56.
Shortest part of male urethra is :
 a) Prostatic

 b) Membranous

 c) Bulbar

 d) Penile



Correct Answer - B
B i.e. Membranous
- Membranous urethra is shortest & Penile urethra is longest part.
Prostatic urethra is widest & most dilatable portion & Urethral orifice
f/19 membranous urethra is narrowest & least dilatable part
57. Posterior relation of neck of pancreas ?
 a) IVC

 b) Origin of postal vein

 c) Aorta

 d) Common bile duct



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Origin of portal vein
58. The right suprarenal vein drains into the
 a) Inferior vena cava

 b) Right renal vein

 c) Right Gonadal vein

 d) Left Renal vein



Correct Answer - A
A i.e. Inferior vena cava
Left testicular, ovarian or suprarenal vein usually drains into left
renal vein, before entering the IVC
                                             VeinDrain into
 Organ
   Rt. Suprarenal gland      Rt. Suprarenal veinIVC
   Lt. Suprarenal gland       Lt. Suprarenal veinLeft Renal Vein
Same is true for gonads (testis /ovary) i.e.
    Lt. Gonad (testis or Lt. Gonadal (testicular
                                                 Left renal vein
                  ovary) or ovarian) vein
    Rt. Gonad (testis or Rt. Gonadal (testicular IVC
                  ovary) or ovarian)
                         vein
59. Suprarenal gland gets its blood supply
    from all of the following arteries except:
 a) Aorta

 b) Renal artery

 c) Inferior phrenic artery

 d) Superior mesentric artery



Correct Answer - D
D. i.e. Superior Mesenteric artery
Right suprarenal vein drain into IVC ; and left suprarenal vein drain
into left Renal vein Suprarenal gland is supplied by suprarenal,
renal, inferior phrenic artery and aorta
60. Inferior
    artery?
             pancreaticoduodenal artery is a branch of which of the following



 a) Splenic artery

 b) Left gastric artery

 c) Gastroduodenal artery

 d) Superior mesenteric artery



Correct Answer - D
Inferior pancreaticoduodenal artery is a branch of superior mesenteric artery. It supplies the
pancreas and adjoining part of the duodenum. Its anterior and posterior branches
anastomose with the branches of superior pancreaticoduodenal artery. This anastomosis is
the only communication between the arteries of foregut and midgut.
Branches of superior mesenteric artery are:
Inferior pancreaticoduodenal artery
Jejunal and ileal branches
Ileocolic artery
Right colic artery
Middle colic artery
  61. Superior pancreaticoduodenal artery is a
      branch of?
   a) Hepatic artery

   b) Splenic artery

   c) Gastroduodenal artery

   d) Inferior mesenteric artery



   Correct Answer - C
   Ans. is 'c' i.e., Gastroduodenal artery
   Gastroduodenal artery gives following branches :-
1. Right gastroepiploic artery
2. Superior pancreaticoduodenal artery
62. All of the following are branches of splenic artery, except?
 a) Hilar branches

 b) Short Gastric Artery

 c) Arteria Pancreatica Magna

 d) Right Gastroepiploic Artery



Correct Answer - D
Right Gastroepiploic artery is a branch of superior mesentric artery, a branch of hepatic
artery. The left Gastroepiploic artery is a branch of splenic artery which anastomoses with
the right Gastroepiploic artery.
63. Common hepatic artery is a branch of -
a) Splenic artery

b) Superior mesenteric artery

c) Inferior mesenteric artery

d) Coeliac trunk



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is'd'i.e., Coeliac trunk [Ref BDC 6h/eVoI.2 p. 2761
Common hepatic artery is a branch of coeliac trunk.
64. Esophageal varices occur in which
    portion of esophagus?
a) Upper

b) Middle

c) Lower

d) All sites



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Lower [Ref: AK Dutta P. 275, 2761
Esophageal varices occurs at lower end ofesophagus due to
porto-caval anastomosis.
65. External oblique forms all except?
 a) Lacunar ligament

 b) Pectineal ligament

 c) Conjoint tendon

 d) Inguinal ligament



Correct Answer - C

Inguinal ligament (Poupart's ligament) is the folded lower border of
external oblique aponeurosis
Lacunar ligament (Gimbernats ligament) is the crescent shaped
expansion from the medial end of inguinal ligament attached to
pectineal line of pubis.
Pectineal ligament (Cooper's ligament) is strong fibrous band
extending laterally from the lacunar ligament along pectineal line of
pubis. Similar to lacunar ligament, it is made of external oblique
aponeurosis.
Reflected part of inguinal ligament extends from the lateral crus of
superficial inguinal ring formed by inguinal ligament upwards to linea
alba. It forms the posterior wall of inguinal canal.
Conjoint tendon (falx inguinalis) is formed by the aponeuroses of
internal oblique and transversus abdominis muscle and is attached
to pubic crest.
66. Inferior epigastric artery forms the
    boundry of ?
 a) Femoral triangle

 b) Hesselbach's triangle

 c) Adductor canal

 d) Popliteal triangle



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Hesselbach's triangle
The inguinal triangle (Hesselbach’s triangle) is a region in the
anterior abdominal wall. It is alternatively known as the medial
inguinal fossa.
It was first described by Frank Hesselbach, a German surgeon and
anatomist, in 1806.

The inguinal triangle is located within the inferomedial aspect of the
abdominal wall. It has the following boundaries:
Medial – lateral border of the rectus abdominis muscle.
Lateral – inferior epigastric vessels.
Inferior – inguinal ligament.
67. The  boundaries of the interconnection between greater sac and lesser sac of
    peritoneum known as 'Foramen of Winslow' are all, EXCEPT:

 a) Caudate lobe of liver

 b) Inferior vena cava

 c) Free border of lesser omentum

 d) 4th part of Duodenum



Correct Answer - D
Interconnection between greater sac and lesser sac of peritoneum is known as Foramen of
Winslow. It has the following boundaries:

Superior boundary: Caudate lobe of liver

Anterior boundary: Free edge of lesser omentum containing common bile duct, hepatic
artery andportal vein.

Inferior boundary: First part of duodenum

Posterior boundary: Inferior vena cava and abdominal aorta
68. Anorectal angle is formed due to action of
    -
 a) Internal anal sphincter

 b) Circular muscle layer of smooth muscles

 c) Longitudinal muscle layer of smooth muscle

 d) Puborectalis



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is'd' i.e., Puborectalis
The ano-rectal angle (ARA) is the angle between longitudinal
axis ofrectum (which is represented by posterior rectal line) and
longitudinal axis ofanal canal.
The normal average value is 95-96" (physiological range 65-
100').
ARA is an indirect indicator of the puborectalis muscle activity.
During muscle contraction, ARA becomes more acute, while
during relaxing phase it becomes obtuse.
69. Prostate analogue in female is -
a) Skene gland

b) Bulbourethral gland

c) Great vestibular gland

d) Bartholin's gland



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is'a'i.e., Skene gland lRef: Clinical anatomy p.421]
Prostate anolog in femal → > Skene glands (Periurethral
glands).
Uterus and vagina analog in male → > Prostatic utricle.
70. The uterine artery is a branch of which of the following?
 a) Left common iliac artery

 b) Internal iliac artery

 c) Internal pudendal artery

 d) Ovarian artery



Correct Answer - B
Uterine arteries arise from internal iliac artery or hypogastric artery.
It runs downwards and forwards along the lateral pelvic wall until the base of the broad
ligament.

Note: During pregnancy the uterine arteries hypertrophy and their course is straightened.

Ref: Comp Textbook of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Sadhana Gupta, 2011, Page 18
71.
All are true about 1st part of duodenum,
except ?
 a) 5 cm long

 b) Is superior part

 c) Develops from foregut

 d) Supplied by superior mesenteric artery



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Supplied by superior mesenteric artery
Duodenum
Duodenum is 'C' shaped, shortest, widest and most fixed part of
small intestine. It is 25 cm long. It is devoid of mesentery. Most of
the duodenum is retroperitoneal and fixed, except at its two ends
where it is suspended by folds of peritoneum, and is therefore
mobile. Duodenum lies opposite Ll, L2 and L3 vertebrae.
Duodenum is C-shaped curve which encloses the head of pancreas
and is subdivided into four parts :
1. First part (Superior part) : It is 5 cm (2 inches) long. It begins at
the pylorus and meet the second part at superior duodenal flexure.
This part appears as duodenal cap on barium studies.
2. Second part (Descending part) : It is about 7.5 cm (3 inches) long.
It is vertical part which begins at superior duodenal flexure and meet
the third part at inferior duodenal flexure. The interior of second part
of duodenum shows following features :
i) Major duodenal papilla : It is present 8-10 cm distal to the pylorus.
The hepatopancreatic ampulla or ampulla of Vater (joint part of bile
duct and pancreatic duct) opens here.
ii) Minor duodenal papilla : It is present 6-8 cm distal to the pylorus.
Accessory pancreatic duct opens here.
3. Third part (Horizonal part) : It is 10 cm (4 inches) long. It begins at
inferior duodenal flexure and passes towards the left in front of IVC
behind superior mesenteric vessels and root of mesentery to meet
4th part of duodenum.
Fourth part : It is 2-5 cm (1 inches) long and runs upward
immediately to the left of aorta. It ends at duodenojejunal flexure by
joining the jejunum.
Arterial supply
The part of duodenum before the opening of bile duct (major
duodenal papilla) develops from foregut and therefore is supplied by
coeliac trunk through superior pancreaticoduodenal artery, a branch
of gastroduodenal artery, which in trun is a branch of common
hepatic artery. Part of duodenum distal to opening of bile duct is
developed from midgut and therefore is supplied by superior
mesenteric artery through inferior pancreatico​duodenal artery. First
part of duodenum receives additional supply from right gastric artery,
supraduodenal artery (a branch of common hapatic artery),
retroduodenal branch of gastrodudenal artery and right gastropiploic
artery.
   72. Ventral pancreatic duct give rise to ?
    a) Body

    b) Tail

    c) Neck

    d) Uncinate process



   Correct Answer - D
   Ans. is 'd' i.e., Uncinate process
   Development of pancreas
   Pancreas is developed from the two pancreatic buds.
1. Dorsal pancreatic bud :- It is larger and most of the pancreas is
   derived from it i.e. most of the head, and whole neck, body & tail.
2. Ventral pancreatic bud :- It is smaller and forms lower part of the
   head of pancreas including uncinate process.
   During 7th week of development, the ventral and dorsal pancreatic
   buds fuse to form a single pancreatic mass.
   After the fusion of ventral and dorsal pancreatic buds, their ducts
   develop cross communications. Final duct system is formed as
   below ?
1. Main pancreatic duct (Duct of wirsung) is formed by the duct of
   ventral bud, distal part of duct of dorsal bud and an oblique
   communication between the two. The main pancreatic duct join the
   bile duct to form hepatopancreatic ampulla that enters th 2nd part of
   duodenum at major duodenal papilla.
2. Accessory pancreatic duct is formed by the proximal part of the duct
   of dorsal bud. It opens into 2nd part of duodenum at minor duodenal
   papilla, 2 cm proximal (cranial) to major duodenal papilla.
   Anomalies of pancreatic development may be:
1. Annular pancreas :- Two components of the ventral bud fail to fuse
   and grow in oppsite direction arround the duodenum and meet the
   dorsal pancreatic duct.
2. Pancreatic divisum (divided pancreas) :- Ventral and dorsal buds fail
   to fuse with each other. It is the most common congenital anomaly of
   pancreas.
3. Inversion of pancreatic duct :- The main pancreatic duct is formed by
   the duct of dorsal bud, i.e. accessory duct is larger than the main
   duct and the main drainage of pancreas is through the minor
   duodenal papilla.
4. Accessory pancreatic tissue :- May be found in ?
   Wall of stomach, duodenum, jejunum or ileum.
   Meckel's diverticulum.
73. Tail of pancrease develops from -
 a) Hepatic diverticulum

 b) Dorsal pancreatic duct

 c) Ventral pancreatic duct

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is'b'i.e., Dorsal pancreatic duct [Ref I.B. Singh Vh/e p.
28]
  74. Haustrations are present in -
   a) Duodenum

   b) Ileum

   c) Jejunum

   d) Colon



   Correct Answer - D
   Ans. is 'd'i.e., Colon [Rel BDC #/e Vol.2 p. 2661
1. Characteristics features of large intestine (colon) are:-i)
   3longitudinal bands, formed by longitudinal muscle coat, called
   Taeniae coli.
2. Sacculation or haustration
3. Fat filled peritoneal pouches called appendices epiploicae.
   These are not found in appendix, caecum and rectum.
4. Greater part is fixed except for appendix, transverse colon and
   sigmoid colon.
5. Pyere's patches (present in small intestine) are not present.
75. The muscles attached to perineal body are
    A/E
 a) Ischiocavernosum

 b) Bulbospongiosm

 c) Superficial transverse perinea

 d) Deep transverse perinea



Correct Answer - A
A. i.e. Ischiocavernosus
Ten muscles of the perineum converge and interlace in the perineal
body -
a) Two unpaired : (i) External anal sphincter, (ii) Fibres of
longitudinal muscle coat of anal canal.
b) Four paired:- (i) Bulbospongiosus, (ii) Superficial transverse
perenei, (iii) Deep transversus perenei, (iv) levator ani,

In females, sphincter urethrovaginalis is also attached here.
76. Trigone of urinary bladder develops from:
 a) Mesoderm

 b) Ectoderm

 c) Endoderm of urachus

 d) None of the above



Correct Answer - A
With differential growth of the dorsal bladder wall, the ureters come
to open through the lateral angles of the bladder, and the
mesonephric ducts open close together in what will be the urethra.
That part of the dorsal bladder wall marked off by the openings of
these four ducts forms the trigone of the bladder.
Thus, lining of the bladder over the trigone is mesodermal in origin;
The smooth muscle of the bladder wall is derived from the
splanchnopleuric mesoderm.
The apex of the bladder is continuous with the allantois, which now
becomes obliterated and forms a fibrous core, the urachus.
The urachus persists throughout life as a ligament that runs from the
apex of the bladder to the umbilicus and is called the median
umbilical ligament
o Linining epithelium of bladder mucosa is transitional epithelium.
When empty mucosa is thrown into rugae except in trigone, where
mucosa is smooth and firmly adherent.
o just beneath the mucosa of trigone there is layer of smooth
muscle, Trtgonal muscle of Bell which replaces the submucous coat
in trigone area
77.
Anterior relation to upper part of rectum in
male is-
 a) Rectovesical pouch

 b) Sacrum

 c) Seminal vesicle

 d) Ductus deference



Correct Answer - A
Answer-is'a' i.e., Rectovesical pouch lRef; BDC Ple Vol.2 p.
408}
Anteriorly In males
The upper two-thirds of the rectum is related to the
rectovesical pouch with coils of intestine and sigmoid colon.
The lower one-third of the rectum is related to the base of the
urinary bladder, the terminal parts of the ureters, the seminal
vesicles, the different ducts and the prostate.
78. FALSE for seminal vesicles:
    September 2012
 a) Contains large amount of fructose

 b) Stores sperms

 c) Situated on either side near prostate

 d) Secretion of seminal vesicle gives mucoid consistency to
    semen



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B i.e. Stores sperms
Sperms are stored in epididymis
79. Sensory nerve supply of gall bladder is
    through -
 a) Vagus nerve

 b) Trigeminal nerve

 c) Parasympathetic nerve

 d) Facial nerve



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Vagus nerve [Rel BDC &/e Vol.3 p. 2901
Pain sensory fibers to gall bladder are through Vagus,
synpathetic and phrmic nerves. Thus gall bladder pain may be
referred to-a) Through vagus to the stomach (epigastrium).
Through the sympathetic nerves to the inferior angle of the right
scapula. Lateral horn of thoracic 7 segment of spinal cord gives
sympathetic fibres to coeliac ganglion through greater
splanchnic nerve. T7 segment receives pain fibres from skin
over inferior angle of scapula. So visceral pain is referred to
somatic area.
Through the phrenic nerve to the right shoulder (C4 gives
fibres to phrenic nerve and supraclavicular nerves).
80. Uvula vesicae seen in bladder is formed from the following structure ?
 a) Median lobe of prostate

 b) Lateral lobe of prostate

 c) Anterior lobe of prostate

 d) Posterior lobe of prostate



Correct Answer - A
Uvula vesicae is a small elevation situated immediately behind the urethral orifice, which is
produced by the underlying median lobe of the prostate. It enlarges with age due to
enlargement of the underlying median lobe of the prostate and may inhibit complete bladder
emptying.
81. Ligament which prevents spleen to fall in
    left iliac fossa -
 a) Leinorenal ligament

 b) Phrenicolic ligament

 c) Upper pole of right kidney

 d) Sigmoid colon



Correct Answer - B
Answer- 'b'i.e., Phrenicolic ligament [Ref: Gruy's 4Uh/e p.
1107, 1108, 12141
Spleen lies in left side of abdomen (left hypochondrium).
But enlargment of spleen (splenomegaly) does not cause
extension into left iliac fossa.
A pathologically enlarged spleen extends downward and
medially towards right iliac fossa because prenicocolic ligament
and left colic flexure prevent a direct downward enlargement.
82. Floor of Petit triangle is formed by?
 a) Sacrospinalis

 b) Internal oblique

 c) Rectus abdominis

 d) Fascia Transversalis



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Internal oblique [Ref Text book of surgical
anatomy p. 148]
Boundaries of Petit triangle (inferior lumbar triangle) are?
Base - Iliac crest
Anterior boundary (abdominal boundary) → Posterior border of
external oblique muscle.
Posterior boundary (lumbar boundary) - Anterior border of latissimus
dorsi.
Floor is formed by internal oblique muscle.
83. In which of the following vessels
    transverse mesocolon seen ?
 a) Right colic artery

 b) Left colic artery

 c) Middle colic artery

 d) Iliocolic artery



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Middle colic artery
Mesentery of gut                    Vessels contained by mesentery
Mesentery proper (Mesentery Jejunal and Ileal branches of
of small intestine)                 superior mesenteric vessels
Transverse mesocolon                Middle colic vessel
Mesoappendix                        Appendicular vessels
Sigmoid mesocolon                   Sigmoid vessels
84. Ovarian artery is a branch of:
 a) Renal artery

 b) Internal iliac artery

 c) Abdominal part of the aorta

 d) External iliac artery



Correct Answer - C
The ovarian artery arises from the abdominal part of the aorta at the
level of the first lumbar vertebra. The artery is long and slender and
passes downward and laterally behind the peritoneum. It crosses the
external iliac artery at the pelvic inlet and enters the suspensory
ligament of the ovary.
It then passes into the broad ligament and enters the ovary by way
of the mesovarium.
85. Labour pain in uterus is carried by
a) Parasympathetic nerves

b) Sympathetic nerves

c) Pudendal nerve

d) Splanchnic nerve



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b'i.e., Sympathetic nerves [Ref: Clinical obstetics
3d/e p. 9121
Nerve supply of uterus:
The uterus is supplied by both systems, sympathetic and
parasyrnpathetic.
Sympathetic system fibers arisefom Tn, Lt segments and carry
painful sensations from the body of the uterus.
Parasyrnpathetic fibers arise from S2, S3, S4 (in pelvic
splanchnic nerve) and carry painful sensations from cenix.
86. Nerve suply of cremastric muscle ?
 a) Pudendal nerve

 b) Femoral branch of genitofemoral

 c) Genital branch of genitofemoral nerve

 d) Ilioinguinal nerve



Correct Answer - C
Genital branch of genitofemoral nerve
Cremastric muscle is a muscle of scrotum. It is supplied by genital
branch of genitofemoral nerve.
87. True about the anatomy of great
    saphenous vein:
 a) Starts as a continuation of medial marginal vein

 b) Ends of femoral vein 2.5 cm below the inguinal ligament

 c) There are 2 - 5 valves below the knee.

 d) Ascends 2.5 - 3 cm behind tibial malleolus



Correct Answer - A
A i.e. Starts as continuation- of medial marginal vein
88. Posterior relation of right kidney are all
    except -
 a) Diaphragm

 b) Subcostal nerve

 c) 11th rib

 d) Ilioinguinal nerve



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., 11th rib
Posterior surface of both kidney is related to diaphragm, medial
and lateral arcuate ligament, psoas major, quadratus lumborum,
transversus abdominis, subcostal vessels, subcostal nerve,
iliohypogastric nerve, and ilioinguinal nerve.
In addition, the right kidney is related to 12th rib and the left
 kidney is related to 11th and 12th ribs.
89. Not True about blood supply of kidney -
 a) Renal vein drains into IVC

 b) Renal artery is a branch of common iliac artery

 c) Right renal artery passes behind IVC

 d) Branches of renal artery are end arteries



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b'i.e., Renal artery is a branch of common iliac
artery [Re/ BDC &/eVol.2 p. 313-3171
Each kidney is supplied by renal artery (branch of abdominal
aorta) and is drained by renal vein to IVC.
Renal artery:- Right renal artery is longer and passes behind
IVC.
Branches of the renal artery are end arteries.
90. All pass through deep inguinal ring, EXCEPT?
 a) Spermatic cord

 b) Internal spermatic fascia

 c) Round ligament

 d) Ilioinguinal nerve



Correct Answer - D
It transmits the spermatic cord in the male and the round ligament of the uterus in the
female into the inguinal canal. Internal spermatic fascia is present in the spermatic cord. Ilio
inguinal nerve passes only through the superficial inguinal canal and not through deep.

Inguinal canal: contains the spermatic cord and the ilioinguinal nerve in the male, and the
round ligament of the uterus and the ilioinguinal nerve in the female. It is an oblique canal of
about 4 cm. long, slanting downward and medialward, and placed parallel with and a little
above the inguinal ligament; it extends from the deep inguinal ring laterally to the superficial
inguinal ring medially.
 Deep inguinal ring: a hole in transversalis fascia lying 3cm superior to the midpoint of the
inguinal ligament.
Contents:
Spermatic cord in males
Round ligament in females
Superficial inguinal ring: V-shaped defect in the lower medial fibres of the external
oblique just superior and lateral to the pubic tubercle. Ilioinguinal nerve passes through
superficial inguinal ring.

Contents of inguinal canal
Spermatic cord in males
Round ligament in females
Ilioinguinal nerve in both males and females
91. Superficial inguinal ring is a defect in the:
 a) Internal oblique aponeurosis

 b) External oblique aponeurosis

 c) Transverse abdominis aponeurosis

 d) Internal oblique muscle



Correct Answer - B
The inguinal canal is an oblique passage through the lower part of
the anterior abdominal wall.
The canal is about 1.5 in. (4 cm) long in the adult and extends from
the deep inguinal ring, a hole in the fascia transversalis, downward
and medially to the superficial inguinal ring, a hole in the
aponeurosis of the external oblique muscle. In the males, it allows
structures to pass to and from the testis to the abdomen.
In females it allows the round ligament of the uterus to pass from the
uterus to the labium majus.
92. All are components of Spermatic cord
    except :
 a) Poupart's ligament

 b) Genito-femoral nerve

 c) Vas deferens

 d) Pampiniform plexus



Correct Answer - A
A i.e. Poupart's ligament
Poupart's ligament is also called as inguinal ligament. It forms the
base of inguinal canal.
Constituents of spermatic cord are:
Ductus deferens
Testicular and cremasteric arteries, and the artery of the ductus
deferens
Pampiniform plexus of veins
Lymph vessels from the testis
Genital branch of the genitofemoral nerve and the sympathetic nerve
plexus around the artery to the ductus deferens and visceral afferent
nerve fibres.
Remains of the processus vaginalis.
93. Superficial perineal space contains ?
 a) Sphincter urethrae muscle

 b) Ischiocavernosus muscle

 c) Deep transverse perinei muscle

 d) Bulbourethral gland



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Ischiocavernosus muscle
94.
3'd part of duodenum is not related -
a) Superior mesenteric vessels

b) Right ureter

c) Head of pancreas

d) Quadrate lobe of liver



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e.,Quadrate lobe of liver [Ref BDC 6h/e VoL2
p.2sg_262]
Anterior:-
Superior mesenteric vessel
Root of mesentery
Posterior
Right ureter
Right psoas major
Right testicular or ovarian vessels
IVC
Abdominal aorta with origin of inferior mesenteric artery
Superior
Head of pancreas with uncinate process.
Inferior
Coils of jejunum
95. Gastrosplenic ligament contains ?
 a) Splenic vessels

 b) Tail of pancreas

 c) Short gastric artery

 d) Portal vein



Correct Answer - C
Short gastric artery
96. Which of the following is a derivative of
    ventral mesogastrium ?
 a) Greater omentum

 b) Gastrosplenic ligament

 c) Linorenal ligament

 d) Lesser omentum



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Lesser omentum
97. Correct sequence of uterine blood flow -
 a) Uterine A - Arcuate A Radial A Spiral A

 b) Uterine A Radial A - Arcuate A Spiral A

 c) Uterine A Spiral A Radial A Arcuate A

 d) Uterine A Arcuate A → Spiral A - Radial A



Correct Answer - A
Answer- is'a 'i.e., Uterine A - Arcuate A Radial A Spiral A [Ref:
Textbook of OBG p. 3061
just Prior to contact with uterus, the uterine artery gives
descending uterine artery Oaginal artery) which supply
the isthmus, cervix and upper vagina.
After joining the uterus, the uterine artery ascends along the
lateral margin of uterus as ascending uterine artery.
Asending uterine artery gives several branches between middle
and outer thirds of myometrium. These are called arcuate
arteries because of their semicircular course.
Arcuate arteries give radial arteries which in turn terminate as
spiral arteriole.
98. Nerve supply of stapedius is:
 a) 2nd nerve

 b) 3rd nerve

 c) 5th nerve

 d) 7th nerve



Correct Answer - D
D. i.e. 7th nerve
99. Stapedius pulls stapes in which direction -
 a) Anterior

 b) Superior

 c) Inferior

 d) Posterior



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Posterior [Ref: Textbook of auditory
processing p. 361
Contraction ofthe stapedius muscle pulls the stapes head in
posterior direction.
Contraction of tensor tympani pulls the malleus and tympanic
membrane inward with a lateral to medial motion.
Contraction of these muscles stiffen the tympanic membrane
and ossicular chain thereby reducing the mobility of the middle
ear and decreasing the sensitIVIty of ear to air-conducted sound.
  100. Sternocleidomastoid muscle is examined
       by
   a) Turning the head towards the same side

   b) Turning the head towards opposite side

   c) Shrugging of shoulder

   d) Overhead abduction



   Correct Answer - B
   Ans. is 'b' i.e., Turning the head towards opposite side [Rel
   BDC 6h/e VoI.3 p. 89]
   Contraction of one side of sternocleidomastoid causes :
1. Tilting (bending) of head on same side
2. Turning (rotation) of face and head on opposite side, which can
   be appreciated as turning of chin to opposite side
101. Occulomotor nerve supplies all
     extraocular muscles except ?
 a) Superior rectus

 b) Inferior rectus

 c) Lateral rectus

 d) Medial rectus



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Lateral rectus
102. Major central nucleus of sympathetic
     system is
 a) Nucleus ambiguus

 b) Nucleus tractus solitarius

 c) Edinger-Westphal nucleus

 d) Hypothalamus



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is'd'i.e., Hypothalamus
The highest seat of regulation of autonomic nervous system (both
sympathetic & parasympathetic) is hypothalamus.
103. What is attached to the superior nuchal
     line?
a) Trapezius

b) Scalenus anticus

c) Coracobrachialis

d) Biceps Brachii



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is'a'i.e., Trapezius
[Ref: Snell's th/e p. 3a2l
Muscles attached to superior nuchal line
Occipitalis muscle,
The splenius capitis muscle
Trapezius muscle,
Sternocleidomastoid muscle
104. Dangerous area of scalp is -
a) Superficial facia

b) Aponeurosis

c) Subaponeurotic tissue

d) Pericranium



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is'c'i.e., Subaponeurotic tissue
Loose subaponeurotic areolar tissue (4s layer) is called
dangerous area of scalp because it contains emissary veins
throughwhich infection in subaponeurotic space may spread
readily to intracranial venous sinuses
105. Which nerve is preserved in dissecting
     the superficial and deep lobes of parotid
     gland -
 a) Glossopharyngeal

 b) Hypoglossal

 c) Lingual

 d) Facial



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Facial [Ref- Anatomy recall by jared Antevil]
The facial nerve separates parotid gland into superficial and
deep lobes.
Mandibular branch of facial nerve is most vulnerable to injury
during parotid surgery
  106. Which intrinsic ocular muscle is supplied
       by parasympathetic innervation -
    a) Superior rectus

    b) Superior oblique

    c) Constrictor pupillae

    d) Dilator pupillae



   Correct Answer - C
   Ans. is'c'i.e., Constrictor pupillae [Ref: Gray's 39h/e p. 7101
   Intraocular muscles (intraocular muscles)
   → Intraocular muscles are -
   A) Muscles of iris
   → There are two types of muscles in iris that control the size
   of pupil:
1. The iris sphinctor or constrictor pupillae (circular muscles):-
    These muscles are innervated by the postganglionic
   parasympathetic fibres from Edinger westphal nucleus via 3'd
   nerve and ciliary ganglion. These muscles cause constriction of
   pupil (Miosis).
2. The iris dilator or dilator pupillae (railial muscles) → These
   muscles are innervated by sympathetic system
   via postganglionic sympathetic fibres for the dilator pupillae from
   neurons in the superior cervical ganglion. These muscles cause
   pupillary dilatation (mydriasis).
   B) Ciliary muscles;--> these are innervated by the postganglionic
   parasympathetic fibers from EWN via 3rd nerve and ciliary
   ganglion. These muscles help in accommodation.
  107. Lips does not drain into which group of
       lymph nodes?
    a) Submandibular nodes

    b) Sublingual nodes

    c) Preauricular parotid

    d) None of the above



   Correct Answer - C
   Ans. is 'c' i.e., Preauricular parotid [Ref: BDC fi/e Vol. 3 p.
   72-751
   → The face possesses three areas from which lymphatic
   drainage is as follows :-
1. Upper area, comparison greater part of forehead, lateral Yz of
   eyelids, conjunctiva, lateral part of cheek and parotid area,
   drains into preauricular (superficial) parotid nodes.
2. Middle area, comprising central part of forehead, external nose,
   upper lip, lateral part of lower lip, medial halves of eyelids,
   medial part of cheek, and greater part of lower jaw, drains into
   submandibular nodes.
3. Lower area, including central part of lower lip and the chin,
   drains into submental nodes.
108. Postganglionic fibres to parotid gland is supplied by?
 a) Glossopharyngeal nerve

 b) Auriculotemporal nerve

 c) Both of the above

 d) None of the above



Correct Answer - B
Preganglionic nerves travel in the lesser petrosal branch of the glossopharyngeal nerve and
synapse in the otic ganglion. Postganglionic fibers reach the gland via the auriculotemporal
nerve.
Nerve supply of parotid gland
Innervation of the salivary gland is as follows:-
Parasympathetic (secretomotor) :
→ They reach the gland through auriculotemporal nerve as the
following route:-
Preganglionic fibers - Originate in the inferior salivary nucleus; pass
through glossopharyngeal nerve; its tympanic branch; tympanic
plexus, and lesser petrosal nerve.
Relay ganglion:- Otic ganglion.
Postganglionic fibers:- Pass through the auriculotemporal nerve to
reach the gland.
Sympathetic (Vasomotor) :
→ Derived from the plexus around the middle meningeal artery.
Sensory: derived from the auriculotemporal nerve, except for parotid
fascia and overlying skin which are innervated by the great auricular
nerve(c2, c3)
109. Secretomotor fibers to parotid glands are
     through -
a) Tympanic plexus

b) Geniculate ganglion

c) Greater petrosal nerve

d) None



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is'A i.e., Tympanic plexus (Ref: BDC @/e Vol. 3 p. 111).
  110. Features of facial nerve palsy are all
       except -
    a) Loss of salivation

    b) Loss of lacrimation

    c) Facial muscle paralysis

    d) Loss of taste sensation from posterior tongue



   Correct Answer - D
   Ans. is 'd' i.e., Loss of taste sensation from posterior
   tongue [Ref: Dhingra 5'h/e p. 105, 106; Gray's 39h/e p. 12131
   Facial nerve paralysis produces following manifestations :
   → Weakness of the muscles of facial expression and eve
   closure. which results in :
1. Absence of nasolabial fold.
2. Wide palpebral fissure
3. Epiphora
4. Drooping of angle of mouth
5. Loss of wrinkles of forehead
6. The face sags and is drawn across to the opposite side on
   smiling.
7. Voluntary eye closure may not be possible and can produce
   damage to the conjunctiva and cornea.
   In partial paralysis, the lower face is generally more affected.
   Loss of taste sensation over anterior 2/3 of the tongue.
   Intolerance to high-pitched or loud noises, i.e. Hyperacusis (due
   to stapedius muscle paralysis)
   Loss of lacrimation and salivation occur
111. The nerve which has the longest
     intracranial course is:
 a) Fourth cranial nerve

 b) Third cranial nerve

 c) Sixth cranial nerve

 d) Fifth cranial nerve



Correct Answer - A
Ans. Fourth cranial nerve
112. Largest cranial nerve is:
a) Trochlear

b) Trigeminal

c) Oculomotor

d) Vagus



Correct Answer - B
Trigeminal
Longest intracranial course           Trochlear nerve
Longest course overall and most       Vagus
widely distributed
Smallest (thinnest) cranial nerve     Trochlear nerve
Largest (thickest) cranial nerve      Trigeminal nerve
The only cranial nerve arising from   Trochlear nerve
dorsal aspect
Only cranial nerve decussating        Trochlear nerve
completely before emerging
Cranial nerve most commonly           Facial nerve
involved in basal skull fracture
Cranial nerve most commonlv           Abducent nerve
involved in raised intracranial
tension
Commonest cranial nerve affected      Abducent nerve
in spinal anaesthesia
Cranial nerve most commonly           Oculomotor nerve
involved in intracranial aneurysm
Cranial nerves carrying               3,7 , 9, 10
paraslrrnpathetic fibers
113. Nasopharynx is lined by which
     epithelium ?
 a) Stratified squamous nonkerationized

 b) Stratified squamous keratinized

 c) Ciliated columnar

 d) Cuboidal



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Ciliated columnar
The two main types of epithelia lining the nasopharynx are stratified
squamous (comprising approximately 60%
of nasopharyngeal epithelium) and pseudostratified columnar
respiratory epithelium containing ciliated cells, goblet cells and
basal cells.
114. Greater petrosal nerve is formed from ?
 a) Geniculate ganglion

 b) Plexus around ICA

 c) Plexus around middle meningeal artery

 d) None of the above



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Geniculate ganglion
Petrosal nerves
Greater petrosal nerve
First branch of facial nerve
Arises from geniculate ganglion
In foramen lacerum it joins deep petorsal nerve and forms the nerve
to pterygoid canal
Supplies lacrimal glands, nose, mucosal glands of pharynx, palate.
Lesser petrosal nerve
Branch of 9t cranial nerve through tympanic plexus (passes via otic
            h

ganglion)
It suplies parotid gland.
Deep petrosal nerve
It is a branch of sympathetic plexus around internal carotid artery.
It contains cervical sympathetic fibers.
External petrosal nerve
It is an inconsistaent branch of sympathetic plexus around middle
meningeal artery.
115. Nerve 3td ventricle is the cavity of -

 a) Mesencephalon

 b) Rhombencephalon

 c) Diencephalon

 d) Telencephalon



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Diencephalon (Ref: BDC Vol.-3 6h/e p. 324,
441)
Part of Brain                       Cavity
A)- forebrain (prosencephalon)
                                    Lateral ventricle
i. Telencephalon(cerebrum)
                                    Third ventricle
ii. Diencephalon (Thalamencephalon)
B)- midbrain(mesencephalon)         Cerebral aqueduct
C)- Hindbrain (rhombencephalon)     Fourth Ventricle
116. Occulomotor nucleus is located in -
 a) Forebrain

 b) Midbrain

 c) Pons

 d) Medulla



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is'b' i.e., Midbrain lRef: BDC 6/e Vol. 3 p' 3501
Cranial nerves I, II → Forebrain
Cranial nerves III, IV → Midbrain
Cranial nerves V, VI, VII, VUI → Pons
Cranial nerves IX, X, Xl, Xll → Medulla
117. Which of the following is pure sensory
     nerve ?
 a) Trigeminal

 b) Abducent

 c) Trochlear

 d) Olfactory



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is'd'i.e., Olfactory
Cranial nerves
Pure
           Pure motor        Mixed
sensory
           Oculomotor (III)
           Trochlear (IV)
Olfactory Abducent (VI)      Trigeminal (V)
(I)        Vestibulocochlear Facial (VII) Glossopharyngeal (IX)
Optic (II) (VIII)            Vagus (X)
            Accessory (XI)
           Hypoglossal (XII)
118. Olfactory Great cerebral vein of Galen
     drains into -
 a) Cavernous sinus

 b) Basal vein

 c) Internal cerebral vein

 d) Straight sinus



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Straight sinus
Great cerebral vein of Galen is formed by the union of two internal
cerebral veins.
It is 2 cm long.
It is drains into the straight sinus.
119. Superficial middle cerebral vein drains
     into -
 a) Internal cerebral vein

 b) Cavernous sinus

 c) Great cerebral vein of Galen

 d) Straight sinus



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Cavernous sinus [Ref Textbook of neuroanatomy
p. 189]
Superficial middle cerebral vein
It runs along the posterior ramus and stem of lateral sulcus.
It drains blood from superolateral surface of the cerebral hemisphere
into the cavernous sinus.
It communicates with the superior sagittal and transverse sinus
through vein of Trolard and vein of Labbe respectively.
   120. Major supply of medial surface of
        cerebral hemisphere
    a) Anterior cerebral artery

    b) Posterior cerebral artery

    c) Middle cerebral artery

    d) Posterior inferior cerebellar artery



   Correct Answer - A
   Ans. is 'a' i.e., Anterior cerebral artery [Ref: BDC 6th/e Vol. 3 p.
   461, 462]
   Cerebral cortex is supplied by branches of all three cerebral arteries.
   All the three surface receive branches from all three arteries.
   But each surface is supplied predominantly by one artery :?
1. Middle cerebral artery is the main artery on superolateral surface.
2. Anterior cerebral artery is chief artery on medial surface.
3. Posterior cerebral artery is principal artery on inferior surface
121. Which nucleus is not seen in floor of the
     4th ventricle -
 a) Abducens nucleus

 b) Facial nucleus

 c) Dorsal vagal nucleus

 d) Hypoglossal nucleus



Correct Answer - B
Ans.is'b'i.e.,Facial nucleus {RefBDC VoI.3 &/e p.410; Last's
l2n/e p. 482, 483}
Medial eminence is present in each side of median sulcus. It
presents facial colliculus formed by genu (recurving fibers) of
facial nerve looping around abducens nucleus. Facial colliculus
lies in pons (i.e. in pontine part of floor).
Hypoglossal triangle overlying the hypoglossal nucleus and vagal
triangle overlying dorsal nucleus of vagus. Both of these triangle
lies in the medulla (medullary part of floor)
122. Ventral tegmental decussation in
     cerebral peduncle is due to -
a) Tectospinal tract

b) Tectobulbar tract

c) Vestibulospinal tract

d) Rubrospinal tract



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is d'ie., Rubrospinal tract [Ref: BDC 6th/e Vol.3 p.398]
Ventral tegmental decussation → Formed by decussation of
rubrospinal tract.
Dorsal tegmental decussation → Formed by decussation of
tectospinal and tectobulbar tracts.
123. Which of the following structures seen in
     the cavernous sinus?
 a) Maxillary division of V nerve

 b) Mandibular division of V nerve

 c) Internal carotid artery

 d) Facial nerve



Correct Answer - C
Ans. c. Internal carotid artery
Contents of the cavernous sinus
Structures in the lateral wall of the sinus
Oculomotor (lll) nerve
Trochlear (lV) nerve
Ophthalmic (1st division of V) nerve
Trigeminal ganglion
Internal carotid artery
Abducent (Vl) nerve
124. True about fallopian tubes are all except
     :
 a) Lined by cuboidal epithelium

 b) Isthmus is the narrower part of the tube that links to the uterus

 c) Tubal ostium is the point where the tubal canal meets the
    peritoneal cavity

 d) MUllerian ducts develops in females into the Fallopian tubes



Correct Answer - A
The two uterine tubes are each about 4 in. (10 cm) long and lie in
the upper border of the broad ligament.
Each connects the peritoneal cavity in the region of the ovary with
the cavity of the uterus.
The uterine tube is divided into four parts:
The infundibulum is the funnel-shaped lateral end that projects
beyond the broad ligament and overlies the ovary.
The tubal ostium is the point where the tubal canal meets the
peritoneal cavity.
The ampulla is the widest part of the tube.
The isthmus is the narrowest part of the tube and lies just lateral to
the uterus.
The intramural part is the segment that pierces the uterine wall.
Function
The uterine tube receives the ovum from the ovary and provides a
site where fertilization of the ovum can take place (usually in the
ampulla).
The inner mucous membrane of the uterine tube is lined by the
ciliated columnar epithelium mixed with the nonciliated secretory
cells or peg cells
The Mullerian ducts develops in females into the fallopian tubes,
The Mullerian ducts develops in females into the fallopian tubes,
uterus and vagina, while the Wolffian ducts develops in males into
the epididymis and vas deferens
125. Lining epithelium of vagina is
 a) Squamous epithelium

 b) Columnar epithelium

 c) Transitional epithelium

 d) Secretory epithelium



Correct Answer - A
Ans: A Squamous epithelium
(Ref: Ramesh Babu p. 24]
Vaginal mucous membrane is lined by nonkeratinized stratified
squamous epithelium.
126. Oxyntic cells are present in -
 a) Pylorus

 b) Cardiac notch

 c) Body

 d) None



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is'c'i.e., Body
Oxyntic.cells are present in principal glands of body and fundus.
These glands are found in body and fundus. These glands
contain mainly chief (peptic or zymogen) cells and parietal
(oxyntic) cells. These glands also contain mucous neck cells,
stem cells and enteroendocrine cells (argentaffin cells).
127. First bone to start ossifying -
a) Femur

b) Tibia

c) Scapula

d) Mandible



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is'd'i.e., Mandible [Ref: T*tbook of anatomy with color
Atlas p. I32l
'The mandible is one of the first bones in the body to start
ossifying being next in this respect only to the clavicle..
Thus, First bone to start ossifying Clavicle. Second bone to
start ossifying → Mandible.
128. Incudomalleolar joint is a ?
 a) Ellipsoid joint

 b) Pivot joint

 c) Hinge joint

 d) Saddle joint



Correct Answer - D
Synovial joints are classified as follows :
1) Plane synovial joints (flat joints)
2) Hinge joints (Ginglymus joints or ginglymi)
3) Pivot or trochoid joints
4) Condylar (bicondylar) joints
5) Ellipsoid joints
Note : Metacarpophalangeal joints are ellipsoid joints functionally,
but structurally they belong to condylar joints.
6) Saddle (sellar) joints
The articular surfaces are reciprocally saddle shaped, i.e. concavo-
convex. Examples are first (thumb) carpometacarpal joint,
sternoclavicular joint, calcaneocuboid joint, incudomalleolar joint
(smallest saddle joint) and patellofemoral joint.
7) Ball and socket (spheroidal) joints
129. Hilton's law is related to -
 a) Venous drainage

 b) Blood supply

 c) Nerve innervation

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Nerve innervation [Rel Textbook operative
orthopaedics p. 7861
Hilton,s law states that nerves crossing a joint supplies that
joint by giving branching to that joint
130. Spermatogenesis begins at -
 a) Birth

 b) 5 years

 c) Puberty

 d) 18 years



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is'c'i.e., Puberty [Ref: Clinical embryology 3'd/e p' 311]
Spermatogenesis refers to the process of formation of
spermatozoa (sperm) from primitite germ cells (spetmatogonia)'
spermatogenesis begins at puberty and continues throughout
adult life to decline in old age.
131. Which is not a stage of prophase -
a) Diakinesis

b) Leptotene

c) Zygotene

d) Arachytene



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is'd' i.e., Arachytene lRef: Essentials of medical
genetics by A'K' Dutta 4'h/e p' 111
132. Fossa ovalis is a remnant of -
 a) Septum primum

 b) Septum secundum

 c) Septum spurium

 d) AV cushion



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is'a'i.e., Septum primum lRef: Readbeloul
Actually 'floor of the fossa ovalis represents septum primum.
Full fossa ovalis is a remnant of foramen ovale
133. Nephron is derived from ?
 a) Ureteric bud

 b) Mesonephric duct

 c) Metanephros

 d) Mesonephros



Correct Answer - C
Development of kidney
Ureteric bud (mesonephros) arise from mesonephric duct and gives
rise to collecting system of kidney (renal pelvis, major and minor
calyces, collecting tubule) and ureter.
Metanephric mesoderm (blastema or metanephors) arise from
nephrogenic cord which in turn is derived from intermediate
mesoderm. It gives rise to excretory unit (nephron), i.e. glomeruli,
PCT, Loop of henle and DCT.
134. Fibrous stroma of liver is derived from -
 a) Foregut endoderm

 b) Midgut endoderm

 c) Hindgut endoderm

 d) Septum transversum



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is'd i.e., Septum transversum Development Of liver
Liver is developed from -i) Endoderm of foregut (endodermal
diverticulum): Most of the liver (including hepatocytes) is
derived from foregut endoderm. ii) Septnm transversum
mesenchyme (mesoderm) : It gives rise to ligaments of the liver
(except ligamentum teres), kupffer cells, hematopoietic cells,
sinusoids and fibrous-areolar stroma of liver'
Ligamentum teres is derived from left umbilical vein.
135. True about Branchial cyst is:
     March 2013 (h)
 a) Cysts are more common than sinuses

 b) Mostly arises from 2nd branchial system

 c) Causes dysphagia and hoarseness

 d) Sinus should always be operated



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B i.e. Mostly arises from 2nd branchial system
   136. True about notochord are all except?
    a) Defines axis of embryo

    b) Serves as primary inductor

    c) Derived from hypoblast

    d) Remains as nucleus pulposus



     Correct Answer - C
     Notochord is a bud like structure formed by epiblast cells extending
     from cranial end of primitive streak to caudal end of prochordal plate,
     in between the ectoderm and endoderm. Siginificances of notochord
     includes following :-
  i. It defines the axis of embryo.
 ii. It functions as the primary inductor, inducing the overlying ectoderm
     to develop into neural plate (the primordium of CNS).
iii. It serves as the basis for development of axial skeleton. The
     notochord is an intricate structure around which vertebral column is
     formed and indicates future site of vertebral bodies. However, the
     notochord does not give rise to vertebral column, after development
     of vertebral bodies, the notochord degenerates and disappears, but
     parts of it persist as the nucleus pulposus of intervertebral disc.
137. Structures derived from the neural crest
     are?
 a) Pia

 b) Dental papillae

 c) Adrenal medulla

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - D
D i.e. All of the above
138. Heart tube is formed at -
a) 3 weeks

b) 6 weeks

c) 10 weeks

d) 12 weeks



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is'a'i.e., 3 weeks [Ref: Embryology by Indu Khurana p.
209]
'Tubular heart is formed at the end of 3d week"
139. Heart tube is formed in
 a) Hyaluronic acid secreted by endocardium

 b) Chondroitin sulfate secreted by endocardium

 c) Hyaluronic acid secreted by myocardium

 d) Chondroitin sulfate secreted by myocardium



Correct Answer - C
Ans-Ans. is'c'i.e., Hyaluronic acid secreted by myocardium
[Ref Textbook of Human Embryolog p. 7861
Cardiac jelly is a thick extracellular matrix rich in hyaluronic
acid. It separates endothelial heart tube from myocardium.
Cardiac jelly is secreted by myocardium.
140. Remnant of umbilical artery
 a) Ligamentum arteriosum

 b) Ligament teres

 c) Ligamentum venosum

 d) Medial umbilical ligament



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is'd'i.e., Medial umbilical ligament {Ref:Garg 2d/e p.
2151}
Embryonic part               Remnants
Ductus arteriosus            Ligamentum arteriosum
Umbilical artery             Proximal part : - Superior vesical
                             artery. Distal part : - Medial
                             umbilical ligament
Umbilical vein (left)        Ligamentum teres
Ductus venosus               Ligamentum venosus
Septum prim urn              Floor offossa ovalis
Septum seconclum             Annulus ovalis / Limbus fossa
                             ovalis
  141. Which of the following is a derivative of
       paramesonephric duct in males ?
   a) Trigone of bladder

   b) Paraphoron

   c) Prostatic utricle

   d) Gartner's duct



   Correct Answer - C
   Two structures are derived from paramesonephric duct in
   males :-
1. Appendix of testis (hydatid of morgagni)
2. Prostatic utricle.
142. Myelination in peripheral nervous system
     is done by
 a) Astrocytes

 b) Oligodendrocytes

 c) Ependymal cells

 d) Schwann cells



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is d i.e., Schwann cells
Myelination in central nervous system → Oligodendrocytes.
Myelination in peripheral nervous system → Schwann cell.
143. Malleus and incus are derived from ?
 a) 1st Arch

 b) 2nd Arch

 c) 3rd Arch

 d) 4th Arch



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., 1st Arch
lst (mandibular arch):-
Muscular Contribution:-Muscles of mastication, Anterior belly of
the digastric, Mylohyoid, Tensor tympani, Tensor veli palatini.
Skeletal Contributions:- Maxilla, mandible (only as a model for
mandible ), Incus and malleus, Meckel's cartilage, Ant. ligament of
malleus, Sphenomandibular ligament.
Nerve:- Trigeminal nerve (V2 and V3).
Artery:- Maxillary artery, external carotid artery.
144. False about limbus fossa ovalis -
 a) Situated above fossa ovalis

 b) In right atrium

 c) Derived from septum primum

 d) Also called Annulus ovalis



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Derived from septum primum
Limbus fossa ovalis (also called annulus ovalis) is a thickened rim in
right atrium, present above the fossa ovalis.
It represents the lower free margin of septum secundum. (not
septum primum.
145. Sertoli cells are derived from -
 a) Genital tubercle

 b) Genital swelling

 c) Primordial germ cells

 d) Germinal epithelium



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Germinal epithelium [Ref I.B.Singh embryology
9thie p. 278]
Testis develops at genital ridge (urogenital ridge).
'Primordial germ cells' are developed in the 4th week by proliferation
of endodermal cells of the dorsal wall of hindgut (part of yolk sac).
The primordial germ cells migrate into genital ridge, where
proliferation of both germinal and nongerminal cells leads to
formation of gonads.
Genital ridge is covered by germinal epithelium (previous coelomic
epithelium), which proliferates and forms sex cords (primitive
seminiferous cords). Large number of sertoli cells are derived from
these sex cords.
Lyedig cells are also derived from sex cord, which in turn is derived
from germinal epithelium.
146. Prolactin secreting gland develops from -
 a) Infundibulum

 b) Rathke's pouch

 c) Tuber cinereum

 d) 3rd ventricle



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Rathke's pouch
Prolactin is secreted by anterior lobe of pituitary which develops
from Rathke's pouch.
   147. Posterior cardinal vein develops into -
    a) Common iliac vein

    b) Superior vena cava

    c) Internal jugular vein

    d) External jugular vein



   Correct Answer - A
   Answer- a' i.e., Common iliac vein fRef: Textbook of
   embryology p. 786
   Derivatives of posterior cardinal veins, subcardinal veins and
   supracardinal veins are :
   1. Inferior vena cava is derived from :?
1. Hepatic segment of IVC is derived from : (i) right hepatic cardiac
   channel, and (ii) anastomotic channel between subcardinal vein and
   right hepatic cardiac channel.
2. Renal segment of IVC is derived from right subcardinal vein. This
   part receives both renal and suprarenal veins.
3. Post renal segment of IVC (major part of IVC) is formed by (i)
   anastomosis between right supracardinal and subcardinal veins, (ii)
   right supracardinal vein (lower part), and (iii) right posterior cardinal
   vein (lowest part).
   2. Gonadal veins develop from subcardinal veins (distal part
   below inter-subcardinal or renal anastomosis).
   3. Suprarenal veins develop from subcardinal veins (proximal
   part above inter-subcardinal or renal anastomosis).
   4. Right common iliac vein is derived from the right posterior
   cardinal vein (most caudal part).
   5. Left common iliac vein develops from transverse
   anastomosis between lower end of posterior cardinal veins.
6. Right renal vein is a mesonephric vein that drains into renal
segment of IVC (which is derived from the upper part of right
subcardinal vein).
7. Left renal vein develops from three sources : (i) mesonephric
vein (drain into left subcardinal vein), (ii) left subcardinal vein
(small part), and (ii) pre-aortic inter subcardinal anastomosis
  148. Superior vena cava develops from -
    a) Right anterior cardinal vein

    b) Left anterior cardinal vein

    c) Left common cardinal vein

    d) Right subcardinal vein



   Correct Answer - A
   Ans. is 'a' i.e., Right anterior cardinal vein lRef: Textbook of
   embryologlt p. 7861
   Superior vena cava (SVC) is derived from
1. right anterior cardinal vein (proximal to brachiocephalic
   anastomosis), and
2. right common cardinal vein.
149. Structure developing from Mullerian duct
     in males?
a) Seminal vesicle

b) Epididymis

c) Prostatic utricle

d) Ureter



Correct Answer - C
Ans. (C) Prostatic utricle
Remnants of Mullerian duct (paramesonephric duct) in males
are:-
Appendix of testis (Hydatid of Morgagni)
Prostatic utricle.
150. Optic cup is derived from ?
 a) Neural ectoderm

 b) Surface ectoderm

 c) Mesoderm

 d) Neural crest



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Neural ectoderm
  151. Which of the following is a derivative of
       Rathke's pouch -
   a) Pars tuberalis

   b) Neurohypophysis

   c) Posterior pituitary

   d) Pineal gland



   Correct Answer - A
   Ans. is 'a' i.e., Pars tuberalis lRef: Textbook of embryology
   p. 7861
   The Rathke's pouch is an ectodermal upgrowth from the
   stomodaeum in front of buccopharyngeal membrane
   The derivatives of Rathke's pouch give rise to the various
   components of the anterior pituitary:
1. Anterior lobe
2. Pars tuberalis
3. Pars distalis
4. Pars intermedia
152. Which of glial cell is mesodermal in
     origin -
a) Macroglial cells

b) Microglial cells

c) Oligodendrocytes

d) Ependymal cells



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is'b'i.e., Microglial cells
Microglial cells are derived from mesenchymal (mesodermal)
cells
153. Trigone of bladder is derived from ?
 a) Mesonephric duct

 b) Paramesonephric duct

 c) Absorbed anal membrane

 d) Mullerian duct



Correct Answer - A
Mesonephric duct
154. Pisiform articulates with -
 a) Scaphoid

 b) Trapezium

 c) Triquetral

 d) Lunate



Correct Answer - C
Triquetral
155. Spleniculi are seen most commonly in:
 a) Colon

 b) Hilum

 c) Liver

 d) Lungs



Correct Answer - B
Spleniculi or accessory spleens are most commonly ( about 80% ) seen at the hilum of
the spleen.
Also know:
Location of accessory spleen in decreasing order are:
Splenic hilum
Gastrocolic ligament
Tail of pancreas
Greater omentum
Greater curvature of stomach
Splenocolic ligament
Small and large bowel mesentery
Left broad ligament of women
Left spermatic cord in men

Ref: Schwartz 9/e, Page 1246; Bailey & Love 25/e, Page 25/e, Page 1103
156. Structures passing through Calot's
     triangle are all EXCEPT:
a) Portal vein

b) Cystic artery

c) Right hepatic artery

d) Lymph node of Lund



Correct Answer - A
Portal vein
THE HEPATOBILIARY TRIANGLE OR CYSTOHEPATIC
TRIANGLE OR CALOT'S TRIANGLE:
Boundaries:
Common hepatic duct medially
Cystic duct inferiorly
Inferior surface of liver superiorly
Contents:
Cystic artery
Right hepatic artery
Lymph node of Lund
157. What structure passes through the
     quandrangular space ?
 a) Axillary nerve

 b) Radial nerve

 c) Median nerve

 d) Brachial Artery



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Axillary nerve lRef Campbell's 12h/e p. 22131
Axillary nerve and posterior circumflex humeral vessels are
transmitted through quadrangular space
158. Seminal colliculus is present in ?
 a) Testis

 b) Prostate

 c) Urethra

 d) Scrotum



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Urethra
Seminal colliculus or colliculus seminalis or verumontanum is
present in the prostatic urethra.
Features of the prostatic urethra
Urethral crest - median longitudinal mucous fold.
Colliculus seminalis (verumontanum): An elevation in the middle of
the urethral crest with the opening of a prostatic utricle at its summit
and an ejaculatory duct on each side.
Openings of ejaculatory ducts: These are present on each side of
the orifice of the utricle.
Prostatic sinuses: These are vertical grooves present on each side
of the urethral crest. They are present with openings of prostatic
glands.
159. Which of the following is not a derivative
     of foregut?

 a) Cecum

 b) duodenum

 c) Liver

 d) Pancreas



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Cecum [Ref Langman 11th/e p. 223]:-
Derivatives are:-
Pharynx
Lower respiratory tract
Esophagus
Stomach
Duodenum upto the opening of the main pancreatic duct Liver
Pancreas
160. Most important factor in transport across
     a membrane?
 a) Charge of particle

 b) Membrane thickness

 c) Size of particle

 d) Concentration gradient



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Concentration gradient
[Ref Guyton 12h/e p. 48-501]
Transport across a cell membrane is divided into passive or active,
based on whether it is along the concentration gradient or against
the concentration gradient.
1) Passive transport
It is in the direction of concentration gradient i.e., “Downhill
movement".
2) Active transport
It is against the direction of concentration gradient, i.e., “Uphill
movement”.
161. Tronsport process which is against
     concentration gradient and carrier
     mediated is ?
 a) Facilitated diffusion

 b) Osmosis

 c) Active transport

 d) Endocytosis



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Active transport
Active transport:
It is against the direction of concentration gradient, i.e., *Uphill
6ovenento.
Energy (e.g., ATP) is required
Carrier proteinis required
Examples are primary active transport and secondary active
transport.
   162. Similarity between active transport and
        facilitated diffusion ?
    a) Energy requirment

    b) Against concentration gradient

    c) Carrier protein

    d) All of the above



   Correct Answer - C
   Ans. C. Carrier protein
   1) Passive transport
   Direction of concentration gradient i.e.,'Downhill movement"
   Does not require energy expenditure
   Example are: -
1. Without carriers: - Simple diffirsion, osmosis
2. Through carrier : - Facilitated diftrsion
   2) Active transport
   It is against the direction of concentration gradient, i.e., *Uphill
   6ovenento.
   Energy (e.g., ATP) is required
   Carrier protein required
   Examples are primary active transport and secondary active
   transport.
  163. Transport through pores in cell members
       is ?
    a) Active transpert

    b) Transcytosis

    c) Diffusion

    d) Endocytosis



   Correct Answer - C
   Ans. C. Diffusion
   [Ref: Guytonp.49]
   Substances can move by simple diffusion directly along the pores
   and channels from one side of the membrane to the other.
   Thus, simple diffusion can occur by two pathways.
1. Through membrane lipid bilayer → for lipid soluble substances.
2. Through pores (water channel) -+ for ions/electrolytes.
164. Percentage of total body water to body
               weight at birth?
 a) 90%

 b) 80%

 c) 60%

 d) 50%



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. 80%
[Ref Principles of medical physiology p.712]
The major component of body mass is water.
The contribution of water to body weight varies with age.
Total body water (TBW) as a percentage of body weight declines
form as high as 90% in early fetal life to 75-80% at birth.
Thereafter it delines progressively to 60% by the end of one year.
After that it remains constant.
165. Epithelial sodium channels has ?
 a) 2a, 213

 b) la, i(3

 c) 2a, 213, 2y

 d) 2a, 113, 2y



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. 2a, 113, 2y
[Ref: Principles of medical physiology p. 241]
There are two different types of Sodium channels:-
Voltage-gated sodium channels:
These are present in Excitable cells.
These exist as heterodimer or heterotrimers of alpha and beta
subunits, containing one alpha and one or two beta subunits.
Epithelial-sodium channels:
These are present in epithelium of absorptive or secretory
epithelium, e.g. colon, sweat gland duct, pancreatic duct, respiratory
passage, and distal tubule of kidney.
These exist as heterotetramers of alpha, beta and gamma subunits,
containing mostly two alpha, one beta and one gamma subunits.
166. True about ENaC are all except ?
 a) Epithelial channel

 b) Composed of 2 homolous subunits

 c) Present in kidney and GIT

 d) Inhibited by amiloride



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Composed of 2 homolous subunits
Epithelial Na+ channels (ENaC) is rate limiting step in Na+
reabsorption across several epithelial linings.
It is present in kidney (distal part), GIT (colon), salivary & sweat
glands, and respiratory tract.
ENaC is made of three homologous subunits > alpha, beta, and
gamma.
In late distal tubules and collecting ducts, ENaC is inhibited by
potassium sparing diuretics like amiloride and triameterene.
167. pH of intracellular fluid is ?
 a) Slightly less than ECF

 b) Slightly more than ECF

 c) Same as ECF

 d) Highly alkaline



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Slightly less than ECF
[Ref: Principles of medical physiology p.132]
Extracellular fluid (ECF) has pH 7.4 (range 7 .35 - 7.45) and is
slightly alkaline
Intracellular fluid (ICF) has H* ion concentration slightly higher than
ECF. Thus, pH of ICF is slightly low than ECF, but still it is slightly
alkaline.
  168. Increased in plasma viscosity is
       maximally caused by which plasma
       protein?
    a) Fibrinogen

    b) Albumin

    c) Globulin

    d) All have equal effect



   Correct Answer - C
   Ans. C. Globulin
   [Ref: Clinical aspects of blood p.80]
   The effect of a protein on plasma viscosity depends on its molecular
   weight and structure.
   The viscosity is higher if a protein has
1. Less spheroid shape
2. Higher molecular weight
3. Higher aggregation capacity
4. Higher temperature or pH sensitivity
   The globulin causes maximum increase in plasma viscosity followed
   by fibrinogen (2d after globnlin) and albumin (3rd in number).
169. Oncotic pressure is contributed by?
 a) Sodium

 b) Chloride

 c) Chloride

 d) Albumin



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Albumin
[Ref: Clinical physiology 3'd/e p.336]
Oncotic pressure, also called colloid osmotic pressure, is a form of
osmotic pressure exerted by proteins in blood plasma that usually
tends to pull the water into the circulatory system.
The major contributing protein for plasma oncotic pressure is
albumin.
170. Most recent taste sensation is?
 a) Sweet

 b) Sour

 c) Bitter

 d) Umami



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Umami
The umami taste is the fifth taste which is unique.
The proposed mechanism of umami taste is through glutamate taste
sensors (glutamate receptors) with release of neuronal glutamic
acid.
In nature, there are three umami substances:
Monosodium glutamate (MSG)
Disodium 5-guanosine mosphosphate (GMP)
Disodium 5-ionsine monophosphate (lMP)
171. Motor evoked potential assess ?
 a) Peripheral motor pathways

 b) Central motor pathways

 c) Both of the above

 d) Regeneration in muscles



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Central motor pathways
Motor evoked potentials (MEPs) are electrical signals recorded from
neural tissue or muscle following activation of central motor
pathways.
It is used for assessment of nervous system, especially during
intraoperative neurophysiological monitoring (IONM).
Most often, this is accomplished by using trans cranial electrical
stimulation (TES) of brain and recording of evoked neural or
myogenic activity distal (caudal) to area that is at risk during surgery.
   172. In electromyograply [EMG] transient
        response at the time of insertion of
        eloctrode indicates ?
    a) Spontoneous muscle activity

    b) Voluntary muscle activity

    c) Induced muscle activity

    d) Cell membrane damage



   Correct Answer - D
   Ans. D. Cell membrane damage
   [Ref: Clinical physiology 24th/e p.222]
   Electromyography is a process of recording electrical activity of
   muscles.
   It can be done by either of the two methods:
1. By putting a surface electrode and recording activity of underlying
   muscle.
2. By inserting a needle electrode into the muscle.
   There are there types of signals (by needle electrode) : -
   i) Insertional activity:
   It is the electrical activity at the time of insertion of electrode due to
   disruption of cell membrane.
   This should be ignored.
   ii) Resting activity (spontaneous activity).
   iii) Voluntary muscle recruitment.
173. True about visual cycle cascade ?
 a) Associated with conformational change in opsin

 b) Light causes isomerization of all-trans-retinol to 11 Cis-retinol

 c) Retinol [alcohol] is involved

 d) All are true



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Associated with conformational change in opsin
There is conformational change in opsin.
Light causes conversion of 11 cis-retinal to all trans retinal.
Retinal (aldehyde) is involved (not retinal).
When light fans on photoreceptors, 11- Cis retinal of rhodopsin is
isomerized to all-trans retinal (Photo isomerization).
The change in physical configuration is such that it cannot hold
protein opsin and therefore two are separated, i.e. rhodopsin is
hydrolyzed.
174. True about smooth muscle contraction ?
 a) Troponin plays an important role

 b) Calmodulin has no role

 c) Phosphorylation of myosin

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Phosphorylation of myosin
[Ref Guyton 12'h/e p.64-66]
In smooth muscle there is no troponin.
Therefore calcium initiates contraction through a mechanism
different from that employed by skeletal muscle.
Smooth muscle contains a calcium binding protein called
calmodulin.
Increase in cytoplasmic (sarcoplasmic) calcium leads to its binding
to calmodulin.
The calcium-calmodulin complex activates myosin kinase, also
called myosin light chain kinase (MLCK).
MLCK is a phosphorylase which phosphorylates a light chain
belonging to myosin chain, often called cross-bridge
phosphorylation.
The phosphorylated myosin head interact with actin, i.e., cross-
bridging of myosin with actin.
The cross-bridging leads to contraction.
175. Increase in Duration of expiration is due
     to?
 a) J-reflex

 b) Head's paradoxical reflex

 c) Hering-Breure reflex

 d) Proprioceptors



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Hering-Breure reflex
[Ref Ganong 24h/e p. 664 6 23d/e p. 632]
The Herring-Breuer inflation reflex is an increase in the duration of
expiration produced by steady lung inflation, and the
Herring-Breuer deflation reflex is a decrease in the duration of
expiration produced by marked deflation of the lung.
176. Wallerian degeneration is for ?
 a) Nerve degeneration

 b) Muscle degeneration

 c) Nerve regeneration

 d) Muscle regeneration



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Nerve degeneration
[Ref: Samson Wright 13h/e p. 288]
The part of nerve distal to the point injury undergoes 'secondary or
Wallerian degeneration', the proximal part undergoes "primary or
retrograde" degeneration up to a single node Ranvier.
177. Withdrawal reflex is also known as ?
 a) Extension reflex

 b) Stretch reflex

 c) Golgitendon reflex

 d) Flexor reflex



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Flexor reflex
[Ref Understanding of medical physiology p. 680]
Withdrawal reflex is a typical protective reflex.
A painful stimulus applied to the hand or foot results in withdrawal of
the limb.
Withdrawal involves flexion of the limb therefore it is also called as
flexion reflex.
Flexion results from contraction of flexor muscles and relaxation of
extensor muscles.
Simultaneous contraction of flexors and relaxation of extensors is
brought about by reciprocal innervation.
178. Tetany in muscle occurs inspite of
     normal serum Ca" level. Which ion is
     responsible ?
 a) Mg2+

 b) Ca2+

 c) K+

 d) Na+



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Ca2+
[Ref: Principles of medialphysiology p. 105, 1061]
During a single twitch, the amount of Ca+2 released into sarcoplasm
is not enough to produce tetanic tension.
When the muscle is stimulated in rapid succession, Ca+2 comes out
into the sarcoplasm with each stimulus and there is a progressive
accumulation of Ca2+ in the sarcoplasm.
Tetanic tension is reached when sarcoplasmic Ca2+ levels reach
their maximum.
179. Unspecified pain pathway is for?
 a) Neuropathic pain

 b) Trauma

 c) Visceral pain

 d) Psychogenic pain



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Psychogenic pain
Textbook of psychotherapy p.6
Idiopathic or unspecified pain: It is purely psychological in nature
and is therefore called psychogenic pain.
180. Pain is carried by which nerve fibers?
 a) Act, A13

 b) Act, Ay

 c) AS, C

 d) Ay, C



Correct Answer - A:C
Ans. A. Act, A13 & C. AS, C
[Rd Ganong 24n/e p. 92 & 23'd/e p. 89; Principles of physiology p.
5121]
Fast fibers carrying pain -+ Ad (fast pain)
Slow fibers carrying pain -) C (slow pain)
181. Action potential generates at fastest rate
     in?
 a) SA node

 b) AV node

 c) Bondle of His

 d) Purkinje fibers



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. SA node
[Ref: Essentials of medicalphysiolog p. 856]
SA node discharges impulses at fastest rate, hence the rate at which
SA node fires determines the heart rate, therefore,
SA node is normal pacemaker of the heart, i.e., it determines the
pace of the heart.
182. Vibration sense is detected by which
     type of receptor?
 a) Merkel's disc

 b) Ruffini's end organ

 c) Paccinian corpuscle

 d) Meissner's corpuscle



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Paccinian corpuscle
[Ref Principles of medical physiology p. 647]
Tactile (touch) receptors
For touch (superficial touch):- Meissner's corpuscle (detect texture of
surface, i.e. rough or smooth), Merkel's disc (detect two point
discrimination).
For pressure (deep touch):- Rufini's end organ (slowly adapting).
Vibrations: Detected by Pacinian corpuscle (rapidly adapting).
183. Vibration sense is detected by ?
 a) Nociceptors

 b) Deep receptors

 c) Superficial receptors

 d) None of the above



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. None of the above
[Ref principles of medical physiology p. 647]
Vibrations are detected by Pacinian corpuscles which are deep
tactile receptors.
Tactile (touch) receptors
Superficial (in epidermis and papillary layer of dermis) > Merkel's
disc, meissner's corpuscle.
Deep (in dermis and subcutaneous tissue) -+ Ruffini's end organ,
Pacinian corpuscle.
184. Vibrations are detected by which types
     of receptors?
 a) Slowly adapting

 b) Rapidly adapting

 c) Non-adapting

 d) None of the above



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Rapidly adapting
Rapidly adapting touch receptors - Pacinian corpwcle, Meissner's
corpuscle.
Slowly adapting touch receptors - Merkel's disc, Ruffini's end organ.
No adaptation - Nociceptors (Pain receptors), vestibular receptors,
muscle spindle.
185. Which of the following receptor is
     stimulated by sustained pressure?
 a) Ruffini's end organ

 b) Merkel's disc

 c) Hair cells

 d) Meissner Corpuscles



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Ruffini's end organ
[Ref; Ganong23r/e p. I50]
Pressure (sustained pressure) stimulates Ruffini's end organ,
186. "Prosopagnosia" is characterized by :
 a) Inability to read

 b) Inability to identify faces

 c) Inability to write

 d) Inability to speak



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Inability to identify faces
Prosopagnosia is a recognition deficit in which the patient is unable
to recognize familiar faces.
Face and object recognition deficits are known as prosopagnosia
and visual object agnosia respectively.
The characteristic lesions in prosopagnosia and visual object
agnosia consists of a bilateral infarction in the territory of the
posterior cerebral arteries and involve lingual and fusiform gyri.
187. Broca's area is concerned with:
 a) Word formation

 b) Comprehension

 c) Repetition

 d) Reading



Correct Answer - A
A i.e. Word formation
Wernicke's area -) Site of integration.
Broca's area -+ Motor part of speech.
188. Broadman's area for motor speech?
 a) Area 1,2,3

 b) Area 4,6

 c) Area 28,29

 d) Area 44



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Area 44
[Ref Fuller's 4 le p. 10; Ganong 24n le p. 293]
Motor speech is formed in Broca's area (area44).
Striate area of cortex is primary visual area (Brodmann's area 17 or
VI) and is located on the sides of calcarine fissure.
189. Maximum density of muscle spindle is
     found in ?
 a) Calf muscle

 b) Lumbricals

 c) Quadrieps muscle

 d) Triceps



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Lumbricals
[Ref - Essentials of medical physiology p.786]
The more refined the function, the greater the concentration of
muscle spindles.
The greatest concentration of spindles is found in the lumbrical
muscles of the hand and then in the sub occipital muscles and in the
extra ocular muscles.
190. Function of epinephirine and
     norepinephine in Fight​or-Flight response
     is ?
 a) Increased blood flow to skin

 b) Increased blood flow to muscles

 c) Bronchoconstriction

 d) Bradycardia



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Increased blood flow to muscles
[Ref, Understanding medical physiology p.470, 471]
Both epinephrine and norepinephrine, along with cortisol, are
responsible for coordinating the "Fight - or - flight" response in
situations of perceived danger or stress.
191. EPSP is due to ?
 a) K' influx

 b) Na* efflux

 c) Na* influx

 d) Ca** influx



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Na* influx
EPSP - Opening of ligand gated Na+ channel resulting in Na+ influx.
IPSP -
Opening of ligand gated Cl- channel resulting in Cl- influx.
Opening of ligand gated K+ channel resulting in K+ influx
192. The only excitatory neurons in cerebellar
     cortex are?
 a) Purkinje

 b) Basket

 c) Golgi

 d) Granule cells



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is'd'i.e., Granule cells [Ref BDC Vol. 3 p 92)
Purkinje cells are the only output cells from cerebellar cortex.
Purkinje cells send inhibitory efferents to deep cerebellar nuclei.
Basket cells inhibit body of purkinje cells while stellate cells inhibit
dendrites of purkinje cells.
Granule cells send facilitatory efferents to basket, stellate and
purkinje cells through parallel fibers.
Climbing fibers and parallel fibers stimulate purkinje cells.
  193. Sleep walking is seen in which stage of
       sleep ?
    a) REM

    b) Stage 1-2 NREM

    c) Stage 2-3 NREM

    d) Stage 3-4 NREM



   Correct Answer - D
   Ans. is 'd' i.e., Stage 3-4 NREM
   Important events occuring during sleep
   Deep sleep/slow wave sleep disorder : - These events occur during
   stage 3 & 4 of NREM. Important disorders are : ?
1. Somnambulism (Night walking) : - Patient walks during sleep.
2. Sleep terror or night terrors (pavor nocturnes) : - The patient
   suddenly gets up screaming, with autonomic arousal (tachycardia,
   sweating). Sleep terrors are rarely remembered in the morning (in
   contrast to night mares). No treatment is required only reassurance
   is required. However, in severe cases benzodiazepine can be used.
3. Sleep-related enuresis (Nocturnal enuresis/bed wetting) : -
   Repetitive voiding occurs during sleep. First line of treatment is
   behaviour therapy. If behavioral therapy fails, desmopressin (DOC)
   and Imipramine can be used.
4. Bruxism (Teeth grinding)
5. Sleep-talking (Somniloquy).
   REM sleep events
1. Nocturnal penile tumescence : - It is spontaneous occurence of an
   erection of the penis during sleep. It is a normal phenomenon and
   occurs for 80-120 minutes per night Nocturnal penile tumescence
   can be used to differentiate between psychogenic impotence and
   organic impotenceas nocturnal penile tumescence is preserved in
   psychogenic impotence but not in organic cause of impotence.
2. Night mares (dream anxiety disorder) : - They are characterized by
   fearful dreams occuring in the last one third of night sleep. The
   person wakes up frightned and remembers the dream vividly (in
   contrast to night terror).
3. Narcolepsy : - This is characterized by excessive day time sleep,
   often disturbed night time sleep and disturbances in the REM sleep.
   Age of onset is between 10-20 years. There is irresistable desire to
   sleep and bouts of sudden sleep each lasting for 10-30 minutes
   occuring during day time. In majority of cases narcolepsy is
   associated with one or more accessory symptoms : ?
   Cataplexy : - It is the most common accessory symptom and is
   characterized by sudden decrease in muscle tone either, local or
   generalized.
   Hypnagogic hallucination : - Hallucination occuring just before falling
   asleep . When hallucination occurs just before awakening it is called
   hyponopompic hallucinations.
   Sleep paralysis (least common)
   Treatment of narcolepsy include stimulant medications
   (methyphenidate, amphetamines) or modafinil.
194. Calcium absorption is hampered by
 a) Protein

 b) Lactose

 c) Acid

 d) Phytates



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Phytates
Calcium absorption is increased by i) Lactose, ii) Proteins, and iii)
Acidic environment
Calcium absorption is decreased by i) Phytates, ii) Phosphates, iii)
Oxalates; iv) Tetracycline; v) alkaline environment
195. Suppressor Strip on anterior edge of pre-
     central gyrus has following function ?
 a) Increase extensor tone

 b) Pain perception

 c) Inhibition of stretch reflex

 d) Voluntary movement



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Inhibition of stretch reflex
[Ref Ganong 25th/e p.242]
"Stimulation of the anterior edge of precentral gyrus causes
inhibition of stretch reflex.
196. Doll's eye reflex is used in?
 a) Hemiplegic

 b) Paraplegic

 c) Unconscious patient

 d) Cerebral palsy



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Unconscious patient
Doll's eye reflex, also called Oculocephalic reflex, is used to assess
brain function in unconscious/Comatose patients.
It checks the vestibule-ocular reflex in unconscious patients.
Head is rotated from side to side with eyes kept open.
i) Positive (normal) -
Eyes move in the direction opposite to that of the head movement.
It signifies intact brainstem.
ii) Negative (abnormal) -
Eyes move in the direction of head movement.
It signifies brainstem damage.
197.
Part of sympathetic system which secrete
chemical transmitter?
 a) Cardiac ganglion

 b) Cervical sympathetic chain

 c) Adrenal medulla

 d) Thoracic sympathetic chain



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Adrenal medulla
[Ref: Textbook of Human physiology by sherwood p.681.]
The Adrenal medulla is actually a modified part of the sympathetic
nervous system.
The adrenal medulla consists of modified postganglionic
sympathetic neurons called chromaffin cells.
Unlike ordinary postganglionic sympathetic neurons, chromaffine
cells, do not have axonal fibers that terminate on effector organs.
Instead, on stimulation by preganglionic fibers, the chromaffine in
cells release their chemical transmitter directly into the blood.
198. Which of the following has direct
     innervation from sympathetic system but
     no parasymputhetic supply?
 a) Heart

 b) Intestine

 c) Skin

 d) None



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Skin
Skin has no parasympathetic supply but has : -
Sympathetic cholinergic supply - sweat gland
Sympathetic adrenergic supply - cutaneous blood vessels.
199. Neuropraxia is ?
 a) Damage to axon

 b) Damage to endoneurium

 c) Damage to epineurium

 d) No Structural damage



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. No Structural damage
[Ref: Apley's 8'h/e p' 231.]
Neuropraxia – No anatomical disruption; axon & myelin sheath
remain intact.
Axontemesis - Disruption of axon with myelin sheath; Endoneurium
is intact.
Nuerotoemesis - Complete section of nerve; Axon, myelin sheath,
endometrium, perimeurium, epineurium all are disrupted.
200. RMP in smooth muscles?
 a) -90 mV

 b) -70 mV

 c) -150 mV

 d) - 40 mV



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. - 40 mV
RMP FOR VARIOUS EXCITABLE TISSUES:
Neuron: -70 mV
Skeletal muscle & Ventricle (cardiac muscle): -90 mV
SA node: -30 to -40mV
Smooth muscle: -30 to -50 mV
Inner ear hair cell: -150 mV
RBC: -10 mV
Thyroid gland: -50mV
Hair cells baseline membrane potential: - 60mV
201. Which of the following statement is TRUE about Bohr's effect?
 a) Decreased affinity of Hb to 02 is associated with decreased pH
    & increased C02

 b) Decreased affinity of Hb to 02 is associated with increased pH
    & decreased C02

 c) Decreased affinity of Hb to 02 is associated with decreased pH
    & C02

 d) Decreased affinity of Hb to 02 is associated with increased pH
    & C02



Correct Answer - A
The decrease in O2 affinity of hemoglobin when the pH of blood falls is called the Bohr
effect.
It is closely related to the fact that deoxygenated hemoglobin (deoxyhemoglobin) binds H+
more actively than does oxygenated hemoglobin (oxyhemoglobin).
The pH of blood falls as its CO2 content increases, so that when the PCO2 rises, the curve
shifts to the right and the P50 rises.

Ref: Barrett K.E., Barman S.M., Boitano S., Brooks H.L. (2012). Chapter 35. Gas Transport
& pH. In K.E. Barrett, S.M. Barman, S. Boitano, H.L. Brooks (Eds), Ganong's Review of
Medical Physiology, 24e.
202. Halden Effect is ?
 a) CO2 delivery by increased 02

 b) 02 delivery by increased CO2


 c) CO2 delivery by increased CO2


 d) 0, delivery by increased CO



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. CO2 delivery by increased 02
[Ref: Ganong 24n/e p. 644 & 23'd/e p. 612]
Because deoxyhemoglobin binds more H+ than oxyhemoglobin
does and forms carbamino compounds more readily, binding of O2,
to hemoglobin reduces its affinity for CO2, (Haldane effect).
203. Total surface area of respiratory
     membrane ?
 a) 25 cm'

 b) 50 cm'

 c) 25 m2

 d) 100 m2



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. 100 m2
[Rel Principles of medical physiology p.340]
Thickness of respiratory membrane is about 0.5 pm and its total
surface area in two the lungs equals about 100 m2.
  204. Damage to pnemotaxic center along with
       vagus nerve causes which type of
       respiration?
   a) Chyne stoke breathing

   b) Deep and slow

   c) Shallow and rapid

   d) Inspiratory Spasm



   Correct Answer - D
   Ans. D. Inspiratory Spasm
   [Ref Principles of medical physiology p. 981).
   Damage to pneumotaxic center or mid pontine transection (between
   upper and lower pons) produces -
1. With vagi intact:- Deep and slow breathing
2. With bilateral vagotomy: Apneustic breathing (apneusis), i.e.
   sustained inspiratory spasm which is interrupted by brief and
   inefficient expiration.
205. Transpulmonary pressure is the difference between:
 a) The bronchus and atmospheric pressure

 b) Pressure in alveoli and intrapleural pressure

 c) Atmosphere and intrapleural pressure

 d) Atmosphere and intraalveolar pressure



Correct Answer - B
Transpulmonary pressure is the pressure difference between
alveolar pressure and intrapleural pressure. Before the start of
inspiration or at the end of expiration it is about +5cm H2O. Positive
transpulmonary pressure keeps the alveoli open.
Intrapleural pressure is the pressure between two layers of pleura.
It is about -5cm H2O before the start of inspiration or at the end of
expiration.
Alveolar pressure is the pressure within the terminal air spaces. It
is the sum of pleural pressure and elastic recoil pressure of the lung.
It is atmospheric before the start of inspiration or at the end of
expiration.
Transthoracic pressure is the pressure difference between
alveolar pressure and pressure at the body surface.
Ref: Fundamentals of Respiratory Physiology By A S Chakrabarty,
Page 32
206. Normal transpulmonary pressure during
     quiet breathing?
 a) + 8 to +5 cm H20


 b) - 8 to - 5 cm H20

 c) 0 to + 1 cm H20


 d) 0 to -1 cm H20



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. + 8 to +5 cm H20
During quiet breathing, transpulmonary pressure is between +8cm
(at end of inspiration) and +5 cm (at end of expiration).
207. What is the partial pressure of oxygen at 760mmHg atmospheric pressure?
 a) 76

 b) 160

 c) 120

 d) 130



Correct Answer - B
The pressure of a gas is proportional to its temperature and the number of moles per
volume.
P= nRT/V, where,
n= number of moles
P= Pressure
R = Gas constant
T= Absolute temperature
V= Volume
The pressure exerted by one gas in a mixture of gases is equal to the total pressure times
the fraction of the total amount of gas it represents.
The partial pressure of oxygen in dry air is therefore 0.21 x 760= 160 mm of Hg at sea
level.

Ref: Ganong, 23rd Ed, Page 588
208. What is the partial pressure for oxygen in the inspired
      air?

 a) 116 mm Hg

 b) 158 mm Hg

 c) 100 mm Hg

 d) 0.3 mm Hg



Correct Answer - B
Partial pressure of O2 in inspired air (Pi O2) - 158 mm Hg
Gaseous concentration & its partial pressure in alveoli:
1. Oxygen:
Concentration & partial pressure controlled by,
* Rate of absorption of O2 into blood
* Rate of entry of new O2 into lungs by ventilatory process.
Values:
* Partial pressure of O2 in inspired air (Pi O2)
  - 158 mm Hg
* Partial pressure of O2 in alveolar air (PA O2)
  - 100 mm Hg
  - Calculated by "Alveolar gas equation".
* Partial pressure of O2 in expired air (PE O2)
  - 116 mm Hg
2. Carbon-di-oxide:
* Partial pressure of CO2 in inspired air (Pi CO2)
  - 0.3 mm Hg
* Partial pressure of CO2 in alveolar blood (PA CO2)
  - 40 mm Hg
* Partial pressure of CO2 in expired air (PE CO2)
  - 32 mm Hg
209. Isocapenic buffering is ?
 a) Increcased pCO2 with increased CO2

 b) Increcased pCO2 with decreased CO,


 c) Normal pCO, with increased CO2

 d) None of the above



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Normal pCO, with increased CO2
* During exercise, initially CO2 production and increase in ventilation
are proprotionate.
  - So, pCO2 remains the same.
  - This is called isocapnic buffering.
* But, in later stages, ventilation increases more than the rate of
CO2 production.
* As a result, PCO2 decreases.
210. Vital capacity is measured by ?
 a) Plethysmography

 b) Gas-dilution methed

 c) Nitrogen washout technique

 d) Spirometer



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Spirometer
Spirometry can measure:- Tidal volume (TV), inspiratory reserve
volume (IRV), expiratory reserve volume (ERV), vital capacity (VC),
forced vital capacity (FVC), FEV.
Spirometry cannot measure:- Residual volume (RV), functional
residual capacity (FRC), total lung capacity (TLC).
211. In patients with emphysematous bullae,
     total lung volume is best determined by?
 a) Spirometry

 b) Helium dilution method

 c) Plathysmography

 d) Any of the above



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Helium dilution method
Total lung capacity (TLC) is determined by helium dilution method
which does not measure volume in bullae.
TLC measured by plethysmography includes the volume of bullae
also.
Thus, gas volume in bullae can be determined by subtracting the
TLC determined by helium dilution from the TLC determined by
plethysmography.
212. All are true about compliance of lung
     except ?
 a) Change in Volume per unit change in pressure

 b) Total Compliance is 0.2 L/cm

 c) A measure of distensibility

 d) Decreased in emphysema



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Decreased in emphysema
[Ref. Principles of medical physiology p.325,326 ; Ganong 24h/e p.
632]
The change in volume per unit change in pressure is called
'compliance'. The total compliance of both lungs together in the
normal adult human being is about 0.2 L/cm water.
That is, every time the trans pulmonary pressure increases by 1
centimeter of water, the lung volume will expand 0.2 L (200 mI).
Compliance is a measure of dispensability.
Compliance is increased in emphysema.
213. Normal respiratory compliance is ?
 a) 200 ml/cm water

 b) 50 ml/cm water

 c) 100 ml/cm water

 d) 150 ml/cm water



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., 200 ml/cm water
The lungs and thoracic cage are both elastic structures. Hence they
display a constant relationship between distending pressure and
change in volume.
The change in volume per unit change in pressure is called
"compliance".
The total compliance of both lungs together in the normal adult
human being is about 0.2 L/cm water.
That is, every time the transpulmonary pressure increases by 1
centimeter of water, the lung volume will expand 0.2 L (200 ml).
Compliance is a measure of distensibility.
214. In relaxation pressure curve, in chronic
     smokers at Zero relaxation pressure ?
 a) Lung volume increases

 b) Lung volume decreases

 c) No change in lung volume

 d) Any of the above



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Lung volume increases
Chronic smoking causes COPD with loss of elasticity of lung and
there is hyperinflation of lung.
Combined recoil pressure of lungs and thoracic cage is inwardly
directed in hyper inflated lungs.
As lung loses its elasticity, thoracic cage distends (expands) to a
higher volume at zero relaxation pressure -+ Functional residual
capacity is increased.
215. Which of the following parameter
     Indicates elimination of CO2 from lung ?
 a) Pa02

 b) pH

 c) PaCO2

 d) HCO, level



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. PaCO2
[Ref: Clinical physiology p.712]
PaCO2 (Partial pressure of arterial CO2) → Reflects the adequacy
of the lungs ventilation and CO, elimination (known as respiratory
parameter).
216. In zero gravity V/Q ratio is ?
 a) 0.8

 b) 1

 c) 2

 d) 3



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. 1
Removal of gravity results in more uniform ventilation and perfusion
this V/Q should be 1.
But, in all recent studies it has been shown, that there are other
(non-gravitational) factors which contributes to V/Q mismatch.
Therefore even at zero gravity, Heterogeneity of perfusion and
ventilation occurs.
Thus, V/Q ratio cannot be 1 at zero gravity.
But, in given scenario we accept simple gravitational model, in which
V/Q ratio must be I' though theoretically.
217. Normal02 extraction ratio of tissues ?
 a) 5%

 b) 15%

 c) 25%

 d) 40%



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. 25%
Normal O2 extraction ratio is 25-30 %
218. Poiseuille's equation states that?
 a) Blood flow is directly proportion to 2nd power of radius

 b) Blood flow is directly proportiom to 4th power of radius

 c) Blood flow is inversely proportion to 2nd power of radius

 d) Blood flow is inversely proportion to 4th power of radius



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Blood flow is inversely proportion to 4th power of radius
Minute volume:
Amount of air breathed in (inspired) or out (expired) by the lungs in
one minute. So, minute volume = Tidal volume x Respiratory rate.
It is at about 6L
219.
Aortic valve closure occurs in which part of
cardiac cycle?
 a) Beginning of isovolumetric contraction

 b) Beginning of ventricular ejection

 c) Beginning of isovolumetric relaxation

 d) During rapid ventricular filling



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Beginning of ventricular ejection
Lung capillary volume – 150ml.
220. Role of ion channels on vascular
     endothelium is ?
 a) Ca+ influx

 b) K+ efflux

 c) Na+ influx

 d) Cl- effux



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Cl- effux
O2 therapy is useful in hypoxic hypoxia like hypoventilation (COPD,
restrictive disease) and high altitude.
It is not useful in anemic hypoxia (anemia, CO poisoning), stagnant
hypoxia (CHF) and histotoxic hypoxia (cyanide poisoning)
221. Action Potential in cardiac muscles has
     how many phases?
 a) 2

 b) 3

 c) 4

 d) 5



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. 5
Blood flow (Q) is the volume flow per unit time (cm3/s), whereas
velocity of blood flow (V) is displacement of blood per unit time
(cm/s).
Increasing the radius two times will decrease the velocity by 4 times.
222. Poiseuille's equation states that
 a) Blood flow is directly proportion to 2nd power of radius

 b) Blood flow is directly proportion to 4th power of radius

 c) Blood flow is inversely proportion to 2nd power of radius

 d) Blood flow is inversely proportion to 4th power of radius



Correct Answer - B
Blood flow is directly proportioned to 4th power of radius.
POISEUILLE'S LAW:
* Also referred as "Hagen-Poiseille's Law".
* Poiseuille's equation states,
  - Q = P1 - P2 * { (Π r4) / (8 η L)}
  - Q - Flow rate
  - (P1 - P2) - Pressure difference across vessel (provided P1 > P2).
  - η - Blood viscosity.
  - r - Radius.
  - L - Tube length.
* If parameter values remains constant,
  - Blood flow is directly proportional to 4th power of radius.
* Resistance of vessel to blood flow can be calculated by combining
Ohm's law with Poiseuille's equation.
  - By substituting values of Q from Poiseuille's law in Ohm's law.
* Implying, resistance is mainly affected by,
  - Blood vessel radius,
  - Vasodilatation/vasoconstriction.
* Thus ultimately, if parameter values remain constant,
  _ Resistance to blood flow is inversely proportional to
4th power of radius.
223. Aortic valve closure corresponds to the
     beginning of:
     September 2011
 a) Systole

 b) Parasystole

 c) Isovolumetric relaxation

 d) Isovolumetric contraction



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C: Isovolumetric relaxation
Cardiac Diastole
It is the period of time when the heart relaxes after contraction in
preparation for refilling with circulating blood.
During ventricular diastole, the pressure in the (left and right)
ventricles drops from the peak that it reaches in systole.
When the pressure in the left ventricle drops to below the pressure
in the left atrium, the mitral valve opens, and the left ventricle fills
with blood that was accumulating in the left atrium.
The isovolumic relaxation time (IVRT) is the interval from the aortic
component of the second heart sound, that is, closure of the aortic
valve, to onset of filling by opening of the mitral valve.
Likewise, when the pressure in the right ventricle drops below that in
the right atrium, the tricuspid valve opens, and the right ventricle fills
with blood that was accumulating in the right atrium.
During diastole the pressure within the right ventricle is lower than
that in aorta, allowing blood to circulate in the heart itself via the
coronary arteries.
224. Cerebral blood flow is increased by ?
 a) Increase in P02

 b) Increase in PCO2

 c) Decrease metabolic rate

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Increase in P02
[Ref: www.ncbi.nlm.nih.govl]
One major function of ion channels in endothelial cells is the control
of Ca2+ influx either by a direct modulation of Ca2+ influx pathway
or by indirect modulation Na+ and Cl channels.
225. ST Segment of ECG Corresponds to ?
 a) Ventricular depolarization

 b) Ventricular repolarization

 c) Atrial depolarization

 d) AV Conduction



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. AV Conduction
Action potential in myocardial fibers has 5 phases :0,1,2,3 and 4.
226. Cerebral blood flow is regulated by all, EXCEPT:
 a) Intracranial pressure

 b) Arterial PC02

 c) Potassium ions

 d) Cerebral metabolic rate



Correct Answer - C
Factors affecting overall cerebral blood flow include:
Intracranial pressure
Local constriction & dilation of cerebral arterioles
Mean arterial pressure at brain level
Viscosity of blood
Mean venous pressure at brain level
The most important extrinsic influences on CBF are respiratory gas tensions particularly
arterial PC02. Cerebral blood flow is directly proportional to arterial PC02 between tensions
of 20 and 80 mm of Hg.

Ref: Barrett K.E., Barman S.M., Boitano S., Brooks H.L. (2012). Chapter 33. Circulation
through Special Regions. In K.E. Barrett, S.M. Barman, S. Boitano, H.L. Brooks (Eds),
Ganong's Review of Medical Physiology, 24e.
227. In an ECG the cardiac event corresponding to the ST segment is:
 a) Atrial depolarisation

 b) Ventricular depolarisation

 c) Atrial repolarisation

 d) Ventricular repolarisation



Correct Answer - D
PR – Interval corresponds with atrial depolarisation and conduction through AV node
QRS – corresponds with Ventricular depolarisation + atrial repolarisation
QT – corresponds with ventricular depolarisation + ventricular repolarisation

Ref: Review of Medical Physiology by Ganong, 20th Edition, Page 532.
228. ST Segment of ECG corresponds to
     which phase of action potential ?
 a) Phase 0

 b) Phase I

 c) Phase II

 d) Phase III



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Phase II
Relation of ECG with phases of action potential -
Phase 0 & 1 = QRS comPlex
Phase 2 = ST segment
Phase 3 = T wave.
229. ST Segment of ECG Correspords to
     which phase of action potential ?
 a) Rapid depolarixation

 b) Rapid repolarizedtion

 c) Find repolarizetion

 d) Plateu Phase



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Plateu Phase
Phase-2 is plateau Phase.
230. Baroreeaptors are located in ?
 a) Tunica media

 b) Tunica intima

 c) Tunica adventitia

 d) None



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Tunica adventitia
Baroreceptors are mechano-receptors that are located in the
adventitia of carotid artery and aorta, at specialized Locations called
sinuses.
231. Baroreceptor are ?
 a) Carotid body

 b) Carotid sinus

 c) Aortic body

 d) None



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Carotid sinus
Baroreceptors are mechanoreceptors that are located in the
adventia of carotid artery and aorta, at specialized locations called
sinuses.
1) Carotid sinus is a little bulge at the root of internal carotid artery,
located just above the bifurcation of the common carotid artery. It is
innervated by the sinus nerve, a branch of glossopharyngeal (IX
cranial) nerve.
2) Aortic arch (aortic sinus) also contains mechenoreceptors (stretch
receptors) which are similar to carotid sinus receptors. However,
their afferent nerve fibers travel in the aortic nerve, a branch of
Vagus (X cranial) nerve.
The sinus nerve (from carotid sinus) and aortic nerve/vagal fibers
(from aortic sinus) are together called `Sino​aortic nerves'. They,
together, are also refered to as 'Buffer nerves' because they are the
afferents of cardiovascular reflexes that buffer abrupt changes in
blood pressure.
232. After load is decreased by ?
 a) Exercise

 b) Anemia

 c) Thyrotoxicosis

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. All of the above
After load (resistance offered to ventricular pumping action) :
Left ventricle has to pump out blood against aortic resistance.
Increased aortic resistance (e.g., high BP) tends to decrease stroke
volume.
Decreased peripheral resistance increases cardiac output e.g., in
exercises, AV fistula or shunt, severe anemia (due to vasodilation by
anemic hypoxia), thyrotoxicosis (due to vasodilation caused by
increased O2 consumption),andwetberi-beri.
233. Oxygen saturation of venous blood is ?
 a) 30%

 b) 50%

 c) 70%

 d) 90%



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. 70%
Mixed venous oxygen saturation is the percentage of oxygen bound
to hemoglobin in venous blood, i.e, blood returning to right side of
heart.
Normal value is 60-80% (average 70 % )
Also know, Arterial oxygen saturation is 95-99 % (average 97 %).
234. Blood pressure is dependant on?
 a) Cardiac output

 b) Heart rate

 c) Stroke volume

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. All of the above
Arterial blood pressure is the product of the cardiac output and the
total peripheral vascular resistance (TPR).
Mean blood pressure is the major determinant of adequate blood
flow through the tissues.
235. Organ with dual blood supply?
 a) Heart

 b) Liver

 c) Kidney

 d) Lung



Correct Answer - B:D
Ans. (B) Liver (D) Lung
Liver has dual supply - Hepatic artery and portal vein
Lung has dual supply - Pulmonary artery and bronchial artery.
   236. Position of stretch receptors in left
        atrium?
    a) AV septum

    b) Interatrial septum

    c) Entrance of pulmonary vein

    d) None of the above



   Correct Answer - C
   Ans. C. Entrance of pulmonary vein
   [Ref principles of medical physiolog p.753]
   Atrial stretch receptors are located at the various venoatrialjunction.
1. Atriocaval receptors are located in the right atrium just at the
   entrance of SVC and IVC,
2. Pulmonary venoatrial receptors are located in the left atrium just at
   the entrance of pulmonary vein.
237. True about Bezold-Jarish reflex?
 a) Hypertension

 b) Tachycardia

 c) Hyperpnea

 d) Hypotension



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Hypotension
The ventricular baroreceptors are scattered throughout the left
ventricle and interventricular septum.
Stimulation of these recePtors by injection of certain drugs (e.g.,
serotonine, veratibine, or niiotine) into the left coronary artery
produces apnea, bradycardia and hypotension.
This is called Bezold-Jarisch reflex or coronary chemo reflex.
238. True about Coronary circulation ?
 a) 250 ml/min

 b) Major flow during systole

 c) Unifrom flow during full cardiac cycle

 d) All of the about



Correct Answer - A
Ans, A. 250 ml/min
The heart receives its blood supply from two coronary arteries right
and left which arise from the root of the aorta.
Coronary blood flow, at rest, is about 250 ml per minute (5% of total
cardiac output).
239. Glomerular filteration of a substance
     depends upon?
 a) Lipid solubility of substance

 b) Binding capacity to albumin

 c) Both of the above

 d) None of the above



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Binding capacity to albumin
Plasma protein binding of a substance decreases is glomerular
filtration.
Only unbound substances are filtered.
Glomerular filtration does not depend on lipid solubility as filtration
occurs through the pores in glomerular membrane
(Lipid solubility affects the transport of substance across cellular
membrane)
240. GFR measurement help in determining ?
 a) Heart rate

 b) Recovery from shock

 c) Stage of kidney disease

 d) Blood volume



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Stage of kidney disease
GFR is a measure of proper functioning of kidney.
Its value determines the stage of kidney disease.
241. Tubuloglomerular feedback is for regulation of?
 a) BP

 b) Blood volume

 c) Na+ reabsorption

 d) GFR



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. GFR
To perform the function of autoregulation, the kidneys have a
feedback mechanism that links changes in sodium chloride
concentration at the macula densa with the control of renal arteriolar
resistance.
This feedback helps to ensure relatively constant delivery of sodium
chloride to the distal tubule and helps prevent spurious fluctuations
in renal excretion that would otherwise occur.
The tubuloglomerular feedback mechanism has two components
that act together to control GFR.
242. Glomerulotubular feedback is for
     regulation of?
 a) BP

 b) Blood volume

 c) Na+ reabsorption

 d) Renal blood flow



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Na+ reabsorption
Tubulo-glomerular feedback - Regulation of GFR in relation to renal
blood flow.
Glomerulo-tubular feedback - Regulation of tubular reabsorption
(especially Na+2) in relation to GFR.
243. Mesangial cell contraction is done by?
 a) cAMP

 b) Dopamine

 c) PAF

 d) ANP



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. PAF
Contraction of mesangial cells is produced by :-Endothelin,
angiotensin II, vasopressin, norepinephrine, PAF, PDGF,
thromboxane A2, PGF2, Leukotrienes C4 & D4, Histamine.
Relaxation of mesangial cells is produced by ANP, Dopamine,
PGE2, cAMP.
244. Mechamism of secretion of ammonia in
     distal tubule is?
 a) Primary active transport

 b) Symport

 c) Antiport

 d) Passive diffusion



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Passive diffusion
Ammonia (NH3) transport involves passive diffusion from tubular
cells into the tubular lumen.
245. A Substance has clearance same as
     inulin clearance, the Substarce is mainly
     excreted in urine by ?
 a) Tubular Secretion

 b) Glomerular filtration

 c) Both a & b

 d) Vascular leakage



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Glomerular filtration
If there be a substance that passes freely across the glomerular
membrane but is neither reabsorbed nor secreted by tubular activity,
urinary excretion would represent the amount filtered and nothing
but the amount filtered.
Hence, its clearance would indicate how much plasma gets filtered
every minute.
All these features make it a very suitable substance for estimation of
glomerular filtration rate.
Inulin clearance is equal to the GFR, i.e., 126 ml/min.
246. Normal Uninary pH is ?
 a) 5.0 - 6.0

 b) 6.5 - 7.0

 c) 8.5 - 9.0

 d) None



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. 6.5 - 7.0
Blood pH – 7.4
Interstitial fluid pH – 7.34
Urine pH – 6.5 – 7.0 (4.5 to 8.0)
247. Increased aldosterone and ADH
     secretiom following major trauma results
     in all the following except ?
 a) Decreased Na+ excretion is urine

 b) Increased K' excretion in urine

 c) Increased osmolarity of urine

 d) Increased water excretion



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Increased water excretion
After major trauma, secretion of ADH and aldosterone increases.
ADH - Causes increased water reabsorption from collecting duct.
Aldosterone - Causes increase Na+&Cl- reabsorption and increase
K+ secretion/excretion.
248. Which carrier pump is transporting solutes in thick
      ascending limb of Henle loop?

 a) Carrier pump Na-K-2Cl transporter.

 b) NaCl- cotransporter

 c) Na2+-H+ exchanger

 d) Na2+-K+ exchanger



Correct Answer - A
Carrier pump Na-K-2Cl transporter.
REABSORPTION IN THICK ASCENDING LIMB:
Sodium, Potassium & Chloride reabsorption:
By “Secondary active transport” -
Through Na2+-K+-2Cl-- carrier transporter.
Transports one Na2+, one K+, & two Cl-.
Active sodium absorption occurs.
30% filtered Na2+ reabsorbed.
249. Receptive area of stomach?
 a) Antrum

 b) Pylorus

 c) Body

 d) Fundus



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Fundus
Anatomically the stomach is divided into fundus, body (corpus),
antrum and pylorus.
However, functionally, the stomach is divided into a proximal and
distal end.
'Proximal stomach' includes fundus and proximal l/3d of the body
and 'distal stomach" includes distal 2/3d of the body and the antrum.
A vasovagal reflex triggered by swallowing a bolus of food causes
the lower esophageal sphincter to open and the proximal stomach to
dilate (receptive relaxation) to accommodate the swallowed food.
As a result, the internal pressure hardly rises in spite of the
increased filling.
Thus, the proximal stomach serves primarily the function of storage.
250. Inner plexus in GIT is ?
 a) Mucosal plexus

 b) Submucosal plexus

 c) Auerbach's plexus

 d) Myenteric plexus



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Submucosal plexus
Myenteric plexus (Auerbach's plexus) - External plexus.
Meissner's plexus (submucosal plexus) - Inner plexus.
251. Function of myenteric plexus is to
     regulate ?
 a) GI secretion

 b) Local blood flow

 c) Motility

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Motility
Myenteric plexus (Aurbach's plexus) controls GI motility.
Meissner's (submucosal) plexus controls GI secretions and local
blood flow.
252. Chymotrypsinogen is activated into
     chymotrypsin by:
 a) Trypsin

 b) Pepsin

 c) Renin

 d) HCl



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A: Trypsin
Trypsin is secreted into the duodenum, where it hydrolyzes peptides
into its smaller building blocks, namely amino acids. Trypsin
catalyzes the hydrolysis of peptide bonds.
Trypsins have an optimal operating pH of about 8.
Trypsins are considered endopeptidases, i.e., the cleavage occurs
within the polypeptide chain rather than at the terminal amino acids
located at the ends of polypeptides.
Trypsin is produced in the pancreas in the form of inactive
trypsinogen.
It is then secreted into the small intestine, where the enzyme
enteropeptidase activates it into trypsin by proteolytic cleavage. The
resulting trypsins themselves activate more trypsinogens
(autocatalysis), chymotrypsinogen, Elastase/ proelastase,
Carboxypeptidase A and B, Colipase and Phospholipase A2.
253. Example of exopeptidase is ?
a) Trypsin

b) Chymotrypsin

c) Elastase

d) Carboxy peptidases



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Carboxy peptidases
254. Secretion of bile out of hepactocytes
     occurs via?
 a) Passive diffusion

 b) Facilitated diffusion

 c) Osmosis

 d) Active transport



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Active transport
Bile contains substances that are actively secreted into it cross the
canalicularmembrane, such as bile acids' phosphatidylcholine,
conjugated bilirubin, cholesterol, and xenobiotics.
Each of these enters the bile by means ofa specific
canaliculartransPorter.
It is the active secretion of bile acids, however, that is believed to be
the primary driving force for the initial formation of canalicular bile.
255. Absorption of calcium ion is affected
     mostly by ?
 a) Calcitriol

 b) Parathormone

 c) Glucocorticoids

 d) ACTH



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Calcitriol
With an average intake of 1000 mg of calcium its net intestinal
absorption is only 150-250 mg/day. Calcium is absorbed mainly in
the duodenum and jejunum (proximal intestine) by an active
transport mechanism regulated by calcitriol.
Parathormone indirectly promotes absorption of calcium by
increasing the renal synthesis ofcalcitriol.
256. Vitamin D absorption is decreased by ?
 a) Proteins

 b) Acid

 c) Lactose

 d) Fat malabsorption



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Fat malabsorption
Absorption of all fat soluble vitamins is decreased in fat
malabsorption.
These fat soluble vitamins are A,D,E and K.
257. Effect of cholecystokinin on GIT ?
 a) Increases gastric acid secretion

 b) Increases small intestinal peristlasis

 c) Increases gastric motility

 d) Relaxes gall bladder



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Increases small intestinal peristalsis
258. Small intestinal peristalsis is controlled
     by :
 a) Myentric plexus

 b) Meissners plexus

 c) Vagus nerve

 d) Para sympathetic system



Correct Answer - A
A i.e. Myentric plexus
Myenteric (Auerbach's) plexus is situated b/w and innervates outer
longitudinal & middle circular muscular layers and is primarily
concerned with motor controlQ. Submucosal (meissner's) plexus
situated between middle circular layer and mucosa is primarly
concerned with control of intestinal secretionQ as it innervates
glandular epithelium, intestinal endocrine cells & submucosal blood
vessels.
259. How is folic acid absorbed in proximal
     jejunum?
 a) Facilitated diffusion

 b) Active transport

 c) Passive transport

 d) Both active & passive transport



Correct Answer - D
Ans D. Both active & passive transport
Folates are Present in natural foods and tissues as polyglutamates
because these forms serve to keep the folates within cell.
In plasma and urine, they are found as monoglutamates because
this is the only form that can be transported across membranes.
Enzymes in the lumen of the small intestine convert the
polyglutamate form to the monoglutamate form of the folate, which is
absorbed in the proximal jejunum via both active and passive
transport.
260. Colipase is:
 a) Is secreted by Oxyntic cells

 b) Is secreted in the active form

 c) Helps gastric lipase

 d) Encoded by the gene CLPS



Correct Answer - D
Colipase is a small protein cofactor needed by pancreatic lipase for efficient dietary lipid
hydrolyisis. It is secreted as an inactive form procolipase by the pancreas and in the
intestinal it is converted to the active form by trypsin. Efficient absorption of dietary fats is
dependent on the action of pancreatic triglyceride lipase. Colipase binds to the C-terminal,
non-catalytic domain of lipase, thereby stabilising as active conformation and considerably
increasing the overall hydrophobic binding site. It is encoded by the gene CLPS.

Ref: Ganong's Review of Human Physiology, 21st Edition, Page 476
261. Cholecystokinin is produced from:
 a) Hepatocyte

 b) Gastric mucosa

 c) Duodenal mucosa

 d) Epithelial cells of distal common bile duct



Correct Answer - C
The major factor controlling the contraction of the gallbladder is the hormone
cholecystokinin (CCK), which is released from the duodenal mucosa (I cells) in response to
the ingestion of fats and amino acids.
Reference:
Harrisons Principles of Internal Medicine, 18th Edition, Page 2616
262. Somatomedin - C deficiency causes?
 a) Achondroplasia

 b) Cretinism

 c) Growth retardation

 d) Juvenile DM



Correct Answer - C
An.s. C. Growth retardation
Effects of growth hormone on skeletal growth is mediated by
somatomedins.
Deficiency of somatomedins causes growth retardation and
dwarfism.
263. All are about adiponectin except ?
 a) Secreted by adipose tissue

 b) Lowers glucose

 c) Increases FFA oxidation

 d) Positive Correlation with BMI



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Positive Correlation with BMI
Adiponection is a hormone secreted by adipose tissue.
It lowers glucose and FFA levels.
Adiponectin has negative correlation with BMI, and more negatively
with visceral fat than subcutaneous fat.
Adiponectin has inszlir sensitizing action and its levels correlate with
insulin sensitivity. By insulin sensitizing action, adiponectin reduces
tissue TG content, increase FFA oxidation, and increase glucose
uptake by tissue.
Adiponectin also inhibits adhesion molecules (E-selectin, VEAM)
and macrophages (decrease uptake of oxidized LDL).
Adiponectin receptors are found in liver and skeletal muscles.
Recently, receptors are also found in pancreas p -cells.
Adiponectin secretion is hormone regulated. Decreased levels with
insulin and glucorticoids are seen.
Adiponection levels are low in obesity, type 2DM, ischemic heart
disease (IHD) anit metabolic syndrome.
Adiponectin gene is located on chromosome 3.
264. Hormone responsible for galactopoiesis
     ?
 a) Growth hormone

 b) Insulin

 c) Oxytocin

 d) Prolactin



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D.Prolactin
Galactokinesis
Also called milk ejection or milk letdovn.
It is brought about by oxytocin which stimulates contraction of the
myoepithelial cells in the mammary alveoli and ducts ie.contraction
of lactiferous ducts and sinuses.
Oxytocin s released when the nipple is stimulated during suckling.
265. Ionotropic effect of thyroid hormone is
     by ?
 a) Membrane receptors

 b) cAMP

 c) Potentiation of Catecholamines

 d) cGMP



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Potentiation of Catecholamines
[RelGanong 24th/e p.j49l
The thyroid hormones increase the heart rate, cardiac contractility,
stroke volume and cardiac output, and consequently also the
systolic BP.
But the diastolic BP may fall due to vasodilatation in several vascular
beds with decrease in peripheral vascular resistance.
The cardiovascular effects of thyroid hormones are partly mediated
by potentiation of effects of catecholamines.
266. 3 - subumit of insulin receptor binds to ?
 a) Guanylyl cyclase

 b) Adenylyl cyclase

 c) IP3-DAG

 d) Tyrosine kinase



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Tyrosine kinase
Insulin receptors
The insulin receptor is a combination of 4 subunits held together by
disulfide linkages - Two Alpha subunits and two Beta subunits,
Alpha subunits lie entirely outside the cell membrane and function as
insulin binding site.
Beta subunits Penetrate through cell membrane and protrude into
the cytoplasm which has attached local tyrosine kinase.
Thus insulin receptor is an example of an enzyme - linked receptor
(insulin k a group IID hormone).
267. Relationship between insulin and
     glucose concentration?
 a) Linear

 b) Hyperbola

 c) Sigmoidal

 d) Bell Shaped



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Sigmoidal
'The Relationship between glucose concentration and insulin
secretion is sigmoidal.
The glucose-insulin response curve come from the discovery that
insulin secretion did not respond as a linear function of glucose
concentration.
268. Insulin mediated transport of glucose is
     ?
 a) Seen in adipose tissue

 b) Via GLUT-2

 c) Main Mechanism in RBCs

 d) All are true



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Seen in adipose tissue
Insulin stimulates the uptake of glucose by myocytes (skeletal
muscle, cardiac muscles), adipocytes (adipose tissue) and
hepatocytes .
Tissues that do not depend on insulin for glucose uptake include
brain, erythrocytes (RBC), the epithelial cells of kidney & intestine,
Liver, and Cornea & lens of eye.
The mechanism through which insulin increases glucose uptake is
different in different tissues. In the muscle and adipose tissues,
insulin increase facilitated diffusion by increasing glucose transporter
(GLUT-4) on the cell membrane.
  269. Not a content of sperm ?
   a) Golgi apparatus

   b) Mitochondria

   c) Lysosome

   d) Endoplasmic reticulum



   Correct Answer - D
   Ans. D.Endoplasmic reticulum
   Spermatozoan (sperm) has following parts :
1. Head
2. Middle piece
3. Principal piece
4. End piece (tail)
  270. Acrosome reaction is seen in?
    a) Spermatogenesis

    b) Oogenesis

    c) Fertilization

    d) Mensturation



   Correct Answer - C
   Ans. C. Fertilization
   To fertilize the ovum the sperms undergo-
1. Capacitation
2. Acrosome reaction
   Acrosome reaction:
   It follows the capacitation of the sperm.
   It occurs in ampulla.
   Sperm binds to zonapellucidaàZona protein -3 (ZP-3) of
   zonapellucida helps in attachment as well as in inducing acrosomal
   reaction.
   Acrosome releases lysomal enzymes, especially proacrosin which
   has high affinity for zonapellucida.
   Proacrosin has hydrolytic action that degrades zonapellucida in the
   very local region where the sperm cell is attached.
   This allows spermatozoa to swim their way to the vitelline membrane
   of the ovum.
   After this fertilization takes place.
271. Iron is conserved by?
 a) Hemopexin

 b) Hepicidin

 c) Hemomedins

 d) None



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Hemopexin
[Ref: Vasudevan 3n/e p. 196]
Human body has mechanisms to conserve iron and prevent its loss
from body-
i) When RBC is lysed, hemoglobin enters into circulation.
Being small molecular weight substance hemoglobin will be lost
through urine.
To prevent this loss, Hb is immediately taken up by haptoglobin.
ii) When the globin part is removed from Hb, the heme is produced,
and is released ito circulation.
In order to prevent its excretion through urine, heme is bound with
hemopexin.
272. Most important intracellular buffer ?
 a) Bicarbonate

 b) Albumin

 c) Phosphate

 d) Ammonia



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Phosphate
Blood buffers: Hemoglobin, Plasma proteins, Bicarbonate.
Intracellular buffers: Phosphates (H2PO4), intracellular proteins.
Urinary buffers - Bicarbonate, Phosphate, ammonia.
273. Primitive red cells first originates in the early embryonic life is in:
 a) Liver

 b) Yolk sac

 c) Bone marrow

 d) Spleen



Correct Answer - B
During embryogenesis, hematopoiesis occurs in extraembryonic yolk sac, the fetal liver, the
thymus, and the preterm marrow. The origin of hematopoietic cells is closely tied to
gastrulation, the formation of mesoderm cells, and to the emergence of the endothelial
lineage. Hematopoiesis is first established soon after implantation of the blastocyst, with the
appearance of primitive erythroid cells in blood islands of the yolk sac beginning at day 18
of gestation.


"Primitive" red cells derived from the yolk sac constitute a distinct
transient erythroid lineage that differs from "definitive" red cells that
subsequently mature in the fetal liver and marrow.

Ref: Palis J., Segel G.B. (2010). Chapter 6. Hematology of the Fetus and Newborn. In J.T.
Prchal, K. Kaushansky, M.A. Lichtman, T.J. Kipps, U. Seligsohn (Eds), Williams
Hematology, 8e.
274. Converging point of both pathway in
     coagulation is at:
 a) Factor VIII

 b) Stuart factor X

 c) Factor IX

 d) Factor VII



Correct Answer - B
Answer is B (Stuart factor X)
The extrinsic and Intrinsic pathways in coagulation converge at the
Stuart factor X.
275. Penile erection is mediated by?
 a) Parasympathetic system via muscarinic receptors

 b) Parasympathetic system via nicotinic receptors

 c) Sympathetic system via a-receptors

 d) Sympathetic system via (3-receptors



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A.Parasympathetic system via muscarinic receptors
[Ref Ganong 24'h/e p.339-342, Ganong 23d/e p.341]
Erection of penis → Muscarinic effect of parasympathetic system.
Ejaculation - alpha-receptor ofsympathetic system
276. Inhibition of heart by vagus is mediated
     by which receptors -
 a) M1


 b) M2

 c) NN


 d) NM2



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. M2
Effect of parasympathetic system on heart are through M2
receptors.
277. Inhibition of heart by vagus by M2
     receptors is medicated by which
     mechanism?
 a) cAMP

 b) Cat'

 c) DAG

 d) None



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. cAMP
Muscarinic receptors (cholinergic receptors) in heart are M2 type.
These are responsible for vagus mediated bradycardia.
M2 mediated actions are through cAMP
278. Glucagon activates which enzyme ?
 a) Pepsinogen

 b) Trypsinogen

 c) Adenylyl cyclase

 d) None



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Adenylyl cyclase
Glucagon acts through cAMP by activating adenylyl cyclase.
279. Size of platelets is ?
 a) 1 A°

 b) 2 A°

 c) 1µm

 d) 2µm



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. 2µm
Platelet = 2-3 micrometer.
280. Respiratery quotient is the Ratio of -
 a) CO2 consumed to 02 released

 b) 02 released to CO2 consumed


 c) Co, released to 02 consumed


 d) 02 consumed to Co, released



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Co, released to 02 consumed
RQ is the ratio of the amount of CO2 released to the amount of O2
consumed.
RQ of Carbohydrate is 1.00, for fat is 0.70 and for proteins it is about
0.82.
281. Intercalated disc is present in:
 a) Cardiac muscle

 b) Smooth muscle

 c) Skeletal muscle

 d) All



Correct Answer - A
A. i.e. Cardiac muscle
282. If HbAl C is 8%, What will be the value of
     blood glucose [mg/d1] ?
 a) 100

 b) 150

 c) 200

 d) 300



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. 200
Mean blood glucose (mg /dl) = (35.6 x HbA1C) - 77.3 = (35.6 x 8) -
77.3 = 207.5
Mean blood glucose (m moUL) = (1.98 x HbA1C) - 4.29
283. Preaccelerin is ?
 a) Eater II

 b) Facter V

 c) Facter VII

 d) Facter X



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Facter VII
284. Conversion of prekallikrein to kallikrein
     requires which clotting factor -
 a) XIII

 b) XII

 c) XI

 d) X



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is'b'i.e., XII
[Rel Essential of medical physiology p. 612]
Initiation of intrinsic coagulation pathway occurs when factor XII is
exposed to negatively charged surface.
This leads to activation offactor XII to XIIa.
Factor XIIa can then hydrolyze prekallikrein to kallikrein, which in
turn activates more XII to XIIa.
285. Caisson's disease is associated with?
 a) Rapid descend in aircraft

 b) Rapid descend of deep sea divers

 c) Underwater construction workers

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Underwater construction workers
Caisson's disease, (also called decompression sickness, Bends,
Diver's Paralysis, Dysbarism) is a particular form of gas embolism,
which occurs when individuals are exposed to sudden lowering of
atmospheric pressure like- rapid ascend of scuba and deep sea
divers , individual in unpressurized aircraft in rapid ascent (e.g., in
pilots), underwater construction workers and extra-vehicular activity
from spacecraft.
286. Regarding Caisson's disease which
     statement among the following is
     CORRECT?
 a) Lung damage is caused by air embolism

 b) Pain in the joints is due to nitrogen bubbles

 c) Tremors are seen due to nitrogen narcosis

 d) High pressure Nervous syndrome can be prevented by using
    mixtures of Oxygen & Helium



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is. B. ain in the joints is due to nitrogen bubbles
[REF: Ganong 22ed chapter
37, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Decompression_sickness]
Decompression Sickness:
As a diver breathing 80% N2 ascends from a dive, the elevated
alveolar PN2 falls. N2 diffuses from the tissues into the lungs along
the partial pressure gradient. If the return to atmospheric pressure
(decompression) is gradual, no harmful effects are observed; but if
the ascent is rapid, N2 escapes from solution. Bubbles form in the
tissues and blood, causing the symptoms of decompression
sickness (the bends, caisson disease). Bubbles in the tissues cause
severe pains, particularly around joints, and neurologic symptoms
that include paresthesias and itching
Lung damage causes air embolism and not vice versa. The problem
of nitrogen narcosis can be avoided by breathing mixtures of 02 and
helium, and deeper dives can be made. However, the high-pressure
nervous syndrome (HPNS) develops during deep dives with such
mixtures. Tremors are symptoms of high pressure Nervous
syndrome
syndrome
       Signs and symptoms of decompression sickness
                Bubble          Signs & symptoms (clinical
DCS type
                location        manifestations)
                Mostly large Localized deep pain, ranging from
Musculoskeletal
                joints          mild to excruciating. Sometimes
                (elbows,        a dull ache, but rarely a sharp pain,
                shoulders, hip, Active and passive motion of
                wrists, knees, the joint aggravates the pain, The
                ankles)         pain may be reduced by bending
                                the joint to find a more comfortable
                                position, If caused by altitude,
                                pain can occur immediately or up to
                                many hours later.
Cutaneous       Skin            Etching, usually around the ears,
                                face, neck, arms, and upper torso,
                                Sensation of tiny insects crawling
                                over the skin (formication),
                                Mottled or marbled skin usually
                                around the shoulders, upper chest
                                and abdomen, with itching, Swelling
                                of the skin, accompanied by
                                tiny scar-like skin depressions
                                (pitting edema)
Neurologic      Brain           Altered sensation, tingling or
                                numbness paresthesias, increased
                                sensitivity hyperesthesia, Confusion
                                or memory loss (amnesia),
                                Visual abnormalities, Unexplained
                                mood or behaviour changes,
                                Seizures, unconsciousness
Neurologic      Spinal cord     Ascending weakness or paralysis in
                                the legs, Girdling abdominal or
                                chest pain, Urinary incontinence and
                                faecal incontinence
Constitutional Whole body Headache, Unexplained fatigue,
                                Generalised malaise, poorly
                                localised aches
                               localised aches
Audiovestibular               Loss of balance, Dizziness, vertigo,
                  Inner ear
                              nausea, vomiting, Hearing loss
Pulmonary         Lungs       Dry persistent cough, Burning chest
                              pain under the sternum,
                              aggravated by breathing, Shortness
                              of breath
287. Following is true about oculocardiac
     reflex except ?
 a) It is also called aschner phenomenon

 b) It is mediated by occulomotor and vagus nerve

 c) It is characterized by bradycardia following traction on extra-
    ocular muscles

 d) Reflex is more sensitive in neonates



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., It is mediated by occulomotor and vagus nerve
Oculocardiac reflex
Oculocardiac reflex, is also known as Aschner phenomenon,
Aschner reflex, or Aschner-Dagnini reflex, o It is characterized by
decrease in pulse rate (bradycardia) associated with traction applied
to extraocular muscles and/or compression of the eyeball.
The reflex is mediated by nerve connections between the ophthalmic
branch of the trigeminal cranial nerve via the ciliary ganglion, and
the vagus nerve of the parasympathetic nervous system.
This reflex is especially sensitive in neonates and children,
particularly during strabismus correction surgery. However, this
reflex may also occur with adults.
Bradycardia, junctional rhythm and asystole, all of which may be life-
threatening,can be induced through this reflex.
288. In CO poisoning, immediate emergency
     treatment:
     Jharkhand 10
 a) 5% CO2 inhalation


 b) 10% CO2 inhalation

 c) High flow O2


 d) Nitroglycerine



Correct Answer - C
Ans. High flow O2
289. Blood testis barrier in testis is formed
     by?
 a) Sertoli cells

 b) Leydig cells

 c) Granulosa cells

 d) None



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Sertoli cells
[Ref Ganong 23'd/e p. 402]
Junction between adjacent sertoli cells form blood-testis barrier.
290. Which of the following is false about
     peripheral nerve injury?
 a) Neuropraxia is irreversible

 b) Epineurium is intact in axonotmesis

 c) Neurotmesis is the most severe form of injury

 d) Wellerian generation starts in axonotmesis



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Neuropraxia is irreversible
Neuropraxia (Class l)
This is the least severe form of nerve injury, with complete recovery.
In this case, the axon remains intact, but there is myelin damage
causing an interruption in conduction of the impulse down the nerve
fiber.
Most commonly, this involves compression of the nerve or disruption
to the blood supply (ischemia).
No Wallerian degeneration is seen.
291. First to occur after a sharp nerve cut ?
 a) Chromatolysis

 b) Polymorphic arrangement

 c) Increased protein synthesis

 d) Macrophage activation



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Chromatolysis
Within 6 hours of injury, the nucleus migrates to the periphery of the
cell where Nissl’s granules and rough endoplasmic reticulum break
up and disperse.
This phenomenon is called chromatolysis.
The part of nerve distal to the point injury undergoes 'secondary or
Wallerian degeneration', the proximal part undergoes "primary or
retrograde" degeneration up to a single node Ranvier.
292. LDH has how many isoenzymes
 a) 3, based on B and M polypeptide subunits

 b) 5, based on B and M polypeptide subunits

 c) 7, based on H and M polypeptide subunits

 d) 5, based on H and M polypeptide subunits



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., 5, based on H and M polypeptide subunits
lRef: Dinesh puri 3'd/e p. 1221
LDH is a tetramer with two types of polypeptide units : (H) (for
heart) and M (for muscle).
 lt has five isoenzymes:
LDH 1 (HHHH), LDH 2 (HHHM), LDH3 (HHMM), LDH 4
(HMMM), and LDH s (MMMM).
LDH-I and LDH-2 are the predominant isozymes in myocardium,
therefore these are raised in MI (LDHf > LDH2),
LDH-f is more specific for myocardium (as it has 4H) than
LDH-2.
The predominent isoenzyme in liver is LDH5; Hence LDH5 is
raised in liver diseases like viral hepatitis.
Normal LDH pattern on electrophoresis is LDH2 > LDHI > LDH
3 > LDH 4 > LDH5.
In MI LDHI is raised more thar LDHz, So, pattern becomes
LDHI > LDH2 > LDH3 > LDH4 > LDH5.
Increase in total LDH level is also seen in hemolytic anemia,
hepatocellular damage, muscular dystrophies, leukemia,
carcinomas, cerebrovascular accident, pancreatitis, kidney
disease, intestinal and pulmonary infarction, megaloblastic
anemia and infectious mononucleosis. Therefore study of specific
isozyme is more significant.
293. Which of the following is known as
     suicidal enzyme?
 a) Lipoxygenase

 b) Cyclooxygenase

 c) Thromboxane synthatase

 d) 5' nucleotidase



Correct Answer - B

Suicidal enzyme is one, which undergoes self-destruction in order to
terminate its own acitivity, e.g. Cyclooxygenase.
Suicidal Inhibition is conversion of a substrate by the enzyme into a
metabolite, which is a potent inhibitor of the enzyme; example:
Xanthine oxidase converts allopurinol to alloxanthine (oxypurinol),
which is a more potent inhibitor of allopurinol.
Cycloorygenase is known as suicide enzyme because it
catalyzes its own destruction.
294. Rate limiting enzyme in bile acid
     synthesis ?
 a) Desmolase

 b) 21 α-hydroxylase

 c) 7α-hydroxylase

 d) 12α-hydroxylase



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., 7α-hydroxylase
About half of the cholesterol in the body is ultimately metabolized to
bile acids.
The primary bile acids are synthesized from cholesterol in liver.
These are cholic acid and chenodeoxycholic acid.
Rate limiting enzyme in primary bile acids synthesis is 7α -
hydroxylase (cholesterol 7α - hydroxylase).
This enzyme is inhibited by bile acids and induced by cholesterol.
Thyroid hormones induce transcription of 7a-hydroxylase, thus in
patients with hypothyroidism plasma cholesterol tends to rise
(because of inhibition of 7α-hydroxylase which in turn inhibits
conversion of cholesterol to bile acids).
295. Enzyme activity is expressed as:
a) Millimoles /lit?

b) Milli gm/lit?

c) Mg/ dl

d) Micromoles/min



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is. D. Micromoles/min
296. Example of allosteric inhibition
 a) Inactivation of glycogen synthase by phosphorylation

 b) Decreased synthesis of glucokinase by glucagon

 c) Inhibition of PFK-1 by citrate

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - C
Answer-Ans. is 'c' i.e., Inhibition of PFK-l by citrate [lRef,
Dinesh puri 3d/e p. 1161 ]
Enzyme:-Phosphofructokinase I
Pathway:- Glycolysis
Stimulator:- AMP, ADP, fructose-6-phosphaie, fuctose-2,6-
bisphophate.
Inhibitor:- ATP, citrate, Ca2+, Mg+
297. Lysyl oxidase requires which cofactor -
 a) Zn

 b) Cu

 c) Se

 d) Fe



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is'b'i.e., Cu [Rel Harper 27t'/e p. 546]
metal         metalloenzymes
Calcium       Lipase, Lecithinase
              Cytochrome oxidase, Tyrosinase, Lysyl oxidase,
Copper        Superoxide dismutase, Ascorbic acid oxidase,
              Ferroxidase (ceruloplasmin)
              Cytochrome oxidase, Xanthine oxidase, Catalase,
iron
              Peroxidase
              Carbonic anhydrase, alkaline phosphatase, RNA
              polymerase, alcohol dehydrogenase,
Zinc          Carboxypeptidase, Prophobilinogen synthase,
              glutamate dehydrogenase, lactate dehydrogenase,
              Superoxide dismutase
              Hexokinase, phosphofructokinase, glucose-6-
Magnesium phosphatase, enolase, creatinine kinase,
              Phosphatases, kinase
              Arginase, Pyruvate carboxylase, phosphoglucomutase,
Manganese
              Glycosyl transferase, Hexokinase, Enolase
Potassium Pyruvate kinase
Selenium      Glutathione peroxidase
Nickel        Urease
molybednumXanthine oxidase
molybednumXanthine oxidase
298. Mechanism of conversion of trypsinogen
     to trypsin -
 a) Hydrolysis

 b) Phosphorylation

 c) Removal of part of protein

 d) Removal of Carboxyl group



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is'c'i.e., Removal of part of protein [Ref: Dinesh puri
3'd/e p- 1181
All zymogens (including trypsinogen) are activated by removal of
a small length of protein (few amino acids) from one end of the
molecule.
Trypsinogen → → Trypsin + peptide fragent
Pepsinogen → → pepsin +peptide fragment
299. Immediate source of energy is ?
 a) Cori's cycle

 b) HMP

 c) ATP

 d) TCA cycle



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., ATP
There are three energy systems to provide energy for muscular
activities.
Immediate energy system : Energy is provided by stored ATP and
creatine phosphate.
Anaerobic glycolytic system (lactic acid system) : Energy is
generated by utilization of glucose or glycogen by anaerobic
glycolysis. This energy is also generated early.
Aerobic or oxidative system : Energy is generated by utilization of
glucose/glycogen, and fatty acids through oxidative pathways, e.g.
TCA cycle.
These three energy systems operate as a continuum; each system
is always functioning, even at rest. o What varies is the relative
contribution each system makes to total ATP production at any given
time.
                                                 Oxidative (aerobic)
               Immediate        An erobic
                                                 system
               energy system glycolytic system
                                                 Glucose or
               ATP, creatine    Glucose or
                                                 glycogen, fatty
               phosphate        glycogen
Substrates                                       acids
Energy production Very
                                Fast             Slow
fast
Peak at        0-30 sec.        20-180 sec.      >3 min
Peak at    0-30 sec.         20-180 sec.        >3 min
Limiting   Depletion of CrP, Lactic acid as_.
                                                Glycogen depletion
factor     ATP               vitiation
Activity   Powerlifting &
                             Longer sprints     Endurance events
example    weight
           lifting, short    Middle distance
                                                Team sports
           sprints           team sports
           Jumping,          Ball games         Ball games (Soccer,
           throwing          (Soccer, rugby)    field hockey)
300. The mechanism of action of uncouplers of oxidative phosphorylation
     involves:

 a) Inhibition of ATP synthase

 b) Stimulation of ATP synthase

 c) Disruption of proton gradient across the inner membrane

 d) Disruption of proton gradient across outer membrane



Correct Answer - C
Uncouplers are protein carriers that can freely pass through the inner mitochondrial
membrane.
It allows translocation of the protons into the intermembranous space during the electron
transport in the respiratory chain but blocks the formation of proton gradient across the
inner mitochondrial membrane.

Thermogenin a protein present in the inner mitochondrial membrane of adipocytes is
an example of physiologic uncouplers of oxidative phosphorylation.

Examples of uncouplers are: 2,4 dinitrophenol, pentachlorophenol, nigericin,
thyroxin and thermogenin.

Ref: Jaypee's Review of Med. Biochemistry By S. M. Raju page 102.
301. True about NADP -
 a) Acts as coenzyme form of Niacin

 b) Involved in HMP shunt

 c) Not involved in glycolysis

 d) All are true



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is'd'i.e., All are true
Niacin, in the form of nicotinamide, is incorporated into the
structure of two coenzymes: nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide
(NAD+ ) and nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate
(NADP+)
NADP is involved in HMP shunt and NAPDH is produced.
In glycolysis NAD is involved (not NADP).
302. In malate shuttle, NADH Produces how
     many ATPs
 a) 1

 b) 1-5

 c) 2

 d) 2.5



Correct Answer - D
Ans-is'd'i.e., 2.5 (Ref : Harp* 2*/e p. 129-130)
In glycerophosphate shuttle, the mitochondrial ennlme is linked
to respiratory chain (ETC) via a flavoprotein, So only l.5 mol of
ATP are produced (According to older calculations,2 ATP mol
of ATP are produced).
In malate shuttle, the mitochondrial enzyme is linked to ETC via
NAD, so 2.5 mol of ATP are produced (according to older
calculations 3 mol of ATP are produced).
  303. Not a substrate for gluconeogenesis -
    a) Glycerol

    b) Leucine

    c) Lactate

    d) Propionate



   Correct Answer - B
   Ans. is 'b' i.e., Leucine
   Substrates for gluconeognesis ?
1. Lactate
2. All amino acids except leucine and lysine
3. Pyruvate
4. Propionate
5. Glycerol
6. Intermediates of citric acid cycle
   Alanine is the most important gluconeogenic amino acid.
  304. Pyruvate dehydrogenase requires all
       cofactors except
    a) Thiamin

    b) Riboflavin

    c) Niacin

    d) Pyridoxin



   Correct Answer - D
   Ans. is 'd' i.e., Pyridoxin [Ref Harper 29thle p. 176]
   Pyruvate dehydrogenase catalyses oxidative decarboxylation of
   pyruvate to acetyl CoA.
   The coenzyme required by PDH are :-
1. Thiamine pyrophosphate
2. Riboflavin(FAD)
3. CoA
4. Niacin (NAD)
5. Lipoic acid
305. Lactate produced anaerobically is used
     by
 a) Gluconeogenesis & Glycolysis

 b) Cori cycle & gluconeogenesis

 c) TCA cycle & Glycogenolysis

 d) Cori cycle only



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b'i.e., cori cycle & gluconeogenesis [Ref Lehninger
4h/e p. 523,53g-391
Cori cycle or lactic acid cycle
Anaerobic glycolysis in muscles results in the production of
lactate, which cannot be converted into glucose,
as gluconeogenesis does not occur in muscles.
Through blood, Lactate is transported to the liver where it is
oxidized to pyruvate. pynrvate so produced, is converted
to glucose by gluconeogenesis, which is then transported to
the muscle.
The glucose thus reformed from lactate again becomes
available for energy purpose in skeletal muscle.
306. Citrate synthase is inhibited by -
a) ATP

b) ADP

c) Insulin

d) Glucagon



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is'a'i.e., ATP [Ref Chatterjee & Shinde Vh/e p. 171,166-
180; Harper 28th/e p. 145-147
   307. Fumarate is formed from which amino
        acid
    a) Methionine

    b) Valine

    c) Histidine

    d) Tyrosine



   Correct Answer - D
   Ans. is 'd' i.e., Tyrosine [Ref Harper 29th/e p. 166-67]
   All major members of the citric acid cycle from citrate to
   oxaloacetate are glucogenic and therefore, are involved in
   gluconeogenesis. Some glucogenic amino acids enters the
   TCA cycle after transamination e.g.:
1. Histidine, proline, glutamine and arginine are converted to glutamate
   which is then transaminated to a-ketoglutarate.
2. Isoleucine, methionine and valine enter by conversion into succinyl
   CoA. Propionate (a short chain fatty acid) also enter at this level.
3. Tyrosine, and phenylalanine enter by conversion into fumarate.
4. Tryptophan is converted to alanine which is then transaminated to
   pyruvate.
5. Hydroxyproline, serine, cysteine, threonine and glycine enter by
   conversion into pyruvate.
308. The major role of 2, 3
     bisphosphoglycerate in RBCs is -
 a) Acid-base balance

 b) Reversal of glycolysis

 c) Release of oxygen

 d) Binding of oxygen



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e.,Release of Oxygen [Ref Lehninger ilthie p. 171]
Rapoport Luebering cycle (Bisphosphoglycerate shunt)
This cycle occurs in erythrocytes (ABCs).
In this production of ATP by substrate phosphorylation from 1,3-BPG
is bypassed by taking diversion pathways, i.e., side reaction of
glycolytic pathway.
In this cycle, 1,3-BPG is converted to 2,3 BPG by an enzyme
bisphosphoglycerate mutase. Then 2,3 BPG is converted to 3-
phospholycerate by 2,3-bisphosphoglycerate phosphatase.
309. Enzyme deficient in Hers disease -
 a) Muscle phosphorylase

 b) Liver phosphorylase

 c) Acid maltase

 d) Debranching enzyme



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is B' i.e., Liver phosphorylase [Ref Harper 250/e p. 181 ]
                                                     Organ (s)
Type                       Enzyme deficiency
                                                     affected
     von Gierke's
I                          Glucose 6-phosphatase     Liver, kidney
     disease
                           alpha (1 → 4) Glucosidase
II   Pompe's disease                                 All organs
                           (acid maltase)
     Cori's
III  disease/Forbe's       Debranching enzyme        Muscle, liver
     disease
                                                     Liver,
IV Andersen's disease Branching enzyme
                                                     myocardium
V    McArdle's disease Phosphorylase                 Muscle
VI Hers' disease           Phosphorylase             Liver
                                                     Muscle,
VII Tarui's disease        Phosphofructokinase
                                                     RBCs
VIII                       Phosphorylase kinase      Liver
310. Immediate metabolic products during
     conversion of Fructus 1-6 bisphosphate
     to 2 molecules of pyruvate -
a) Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate and 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate

b) Dihydroxyacetone phosphate and 1,3 bisphos​phoglycerate

c) Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate and dihydroxy-acetone phosphate

d) 3-phosphoglycerate and 1,3 bisphosglycerate



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate and
dihydroxyacetone phosphate (Ref: Harper 29h/e p. 170-177).
311. In conversion of glucose to glucose-6-
     phosphate in glycolysis true is
a) Glucokinase has low km

b) Hexokinase is found only in liver

c) Glucokinase is induced by insulin

d) Hexokinase is not specific for glucose



Correct Answer - C:D
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Glucokinase is induced by insulin & 'd' i.e.,
Hexokinase is not specific for glucose (Ref: Harper 29h/e p.
170-177; Vasudevan #/e p. 98)
Hexokinase is not specific for glucose metabolism. It is found
in most tissues except glucose.
Glucokinase has high KM. It is induced by insulin.
312. Major carbohydrate store in the body -
a) Blood glucose

b) Glycogen in adipose tissue

c) Hepatic glycogen

d) None of the above



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Hepatic glycogen (Ref: Harper 29/e p. 161;
Dinesh puri 3d/e p. 320)
Major Carbohydrate source of body is hepatic glycogen.
Humans carry supplies of fuel within their body. Calories are
stored in the body as fat (triglycerides), glycogen and some
protein.
313. Most abundant source of fuel in
     starvation -
 a) Liver glycogen

 b) Muscle glycogen

 c) Adipose tissue

 d) Blood glucose



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Adipose tissue [Ref Harper 29thle p. 161 & 28th le
p. 134, 140; Vasudevan 6th/e p. 84, 85]
Fat (triglycerides) in the adipose tissue is the largest store of energy
of the body.
314. Major metabolism of saturated fatty
     acids in the mitochondria is called as -
 a) β-oxidation

 b) α-oxidation

 c) ω-oxidation

 d) None of the above



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., β-oxidation [Ref Harper 29"'/e p. 208]
β-oxidation is the principal pathway for catabolism of saturated fatty
acids. P-oxidation mainly occurs in the mitochondrial matrix
(whereas fatty acid synthesis occurs in cytosol).
315. Bile acids are synthesized from ?
 a) Heme

 b) Cholesterol

 c) Ribulose

 d) Arachidonic acid



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Cholesterol
Primary bile acids are cholic acid and chenodeoxycholic acid, which
are synthesized from cholesterol in liver.
In the intestine some of the primary bile acids are converted into
secondary bile acids, i.e., deoxycholic acid (formed from cholic acid)
and lithocholic acid (derived from chenodexoxycholic acid).
Glycine and taurine conjugates of these bile acids are called as bile
salts.
For example, cholic acid is a bile acid, and its glycine conjugate
(glycocholic acid) is a bile salt.
Bile salts help in digestion and absorption of fat by emulsification
and micelles formation.
Bile salts act as detergents, i.e., they have surface tension lowering
action.
Detergent action is due to amphipathic nature of bile salts (Note :
Amphipathic molecules are molecules that contain both hydrophobic
non-polar as well as hydrophilic-polar ends).
316. Which method is used to separate a
     mixture of lipids -
a) Electrophoresis

b) Chromatography

c) Isoelectric focusing

d) PAGE



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Chromatography [Ref Clinical biochemistry p.
719]
Extracted lipids are separated into individual class by
chromatography.
Chromatography can separate a complex mixture of lipids into
simpler group.
Various types of chromatography, used to separate, lipids are -
Adsorption (solid-liquid) chromatography
Partition (liquid-liquid) chromatography
Thin layer chromatography (TLC)
Gas chromatography (GC)
High performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) -› method of
choice if available.
317. Transport of lipids from the intestine to
     other tissues is by -
 a) Chylomicrons

 b) LDL

 c) HDL

 d) VI DL



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Chylomicrons
Transport of lipids
o There are two pathways of lipid transport in the body ?
1. Transport of dietry lipid (Exogenous pathway)
* It is the transport of 1 ipid.from intestine to liver.
  - Chylomicrons transport the dietry lipid from intestine to liver.
* In Diet the major lipids are triglyceride and Aolesterol.
* Cholesterol is absorbed as such in proximal small intestine and is
esterified to cholesteryl ester (ChE). o Triglycerides are hydrolysed
by lipases to glycerol and fatty acids which are absorbed in intestine.
o Inside intestinal cells triglyceride is synthesized by fatty acids.
  - Chylomicrons are synthesized in the small intestine that contain
triglyceride, cholesteryl ester, cholesterol, phospholipids and
apoprotein B-48 (apo B-48).
* These chylomicrons are secreted in the intestinal lymph and reach
the systemic circulation via thoracic duct.
  - In the circulation Apo E and Apo C are transfered to
chylomicrones by HDL, so now chylomicrons contain Apo B-48, Apo
E, & Apo C.
* In the circulation, Triglycerides of chylomicrones are hydrolysed
by lipoprotein lipase (LPL) present on endothelial cells of vessels
of skeletal muscles, adipose tissue and heart.
* The released fatty acids are utilized locally by these tissues.
* The chilomicron particle progressively shrinks in size by action of
LPL and, cholesterol, phospholipids and apo C are transferred to
HDL, creating chylomicron remnants that contains more cholesterol,
less triglycerides, apo E & apo B-48.
*Chylomicron remnants are removed by liver by the LDL
receptors that require apo E as ligand.
Note - Apo C-II, that is transfered from HDL to chylomicrons act as a
cofactor for lipoprotein lipase. Apo A-V promotes LPL mediated
triglyceride lipolysis in VLDL and chilomicrons.
2. Transport of Hepatic lipids (Endogenous pathway)
* VLDL is synthesized in liver that contains high triglyceride, ChE,
cholesterol, phospholipid and Apo B-100.
* (VLDL particles resembel chylomicrones in composition except that
VLDL contains Apo B-100 instead of ApoB-48).
* VLDL particles are secreted in the plasma and as with
chylomicron, Apo E and Apo C are transferred from HDLto VLDL.
Now VLDL contains Apo B-100, Apo E and Apo C.
* In plasma, triglycerides of VLDL are hydrolysed by same
lipoprotein lipase (see above) and apo C is transferredto HDL and
the remmants are called IDL.
* 40-60% of IDL is removed by liver via LDL receptor mediated
endocytosis, this process require Apo E whichacts as ligand for LDL
receptors.
* Remaining 1 DL is remodeled by hepatic lipase to form LDL that
contains maximum cholesterol.
* 70% of LDL is removed by liver via LDL receptor and 30% is
utilized by peripheral tissues as a source ofcholesterol.
318. Chylomicrons core is formed by ?
 a) Triglyceride

 b) Triglyceride and Cholesterol

 c) Triglyceride, Cholesterol and Phospholipids

 d) Free fatty acids



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'B' i.e., Triglyceride and Cholesterol [Ref Harper 27th/e p.
218; Lehninger 4th/e p. 633]
The surface is a layer of phospholipids, with head groups facing the
aqueous phase. Triacylglycerols sequestered in the interior make up
more than 80% of the mass.
Several apolipoproteins that protrude from the surface (B-48, C-III,
C-II) act as signals in the uptake and metabolism of chylomicron
contents.
The diameter of chylomicrons ranges from about 100 to 500 nm.
Core: It's made up of neutral lipids like triacylglycerols and
cholesterol/cholesterol esters. Shell: composed of apolipoproteins,
phospholipids.
319. (β-oxidation of palmitic acid yields
 a) 3 acetyl CoA

 b) 129 ATP net

 c) 131 ATP net

 d) 16 Acetyl CoA



Correct Answer - B
B i.e. 129 ATP net
  320. All are true about Niemann- Pick disease
       except -
    a) Due to deficiency of sphingomyelinase

    b) CNS symptoms in type A

    c) Histiocytes showing PAS positive inclusions and Type B is less
       severe

    d) None



   Correct Answer - D
   Ans. is D. None [Ref Clinical biochemistry 4th/e p. 786]
   Niemann-Pick disease is an autosomal recessive `lysosomal storage
   disease due to deficiency of sphingomyelinase.
   Characteristic histopathological feature is histiocytes showing PAS
   positive diastase resistant inclusions which on microscopy shows
   concentric or parrallel lamellar arrangement.
   Clinical cases are divided into -
1. Type A: These are more common with more severe deficiency of
   sphingomyelinase. There is visceral and CNS involvement.
   Symptoms may present since birth and death usually occurs before
   the age of 4 years.
2. Type B : There is less severe deficiency of sphingomyelinase.
   Patient's have only visceral involvement but no CNS involvement.
   Patients present by the age of 3-4 years with organomegaly and
   may remain reasonably healthy.
321. Plasminogen domain resembles
 a) Fibrinogen

 b) LDL receptor

 c) Apolipoprotein (a)

 d) Prothrombin



Correct Answer - C
Apolipoprotein (a) REF:
http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/pro.5560031222/pdf,http://www.ncbi.nlm.
Phylogeny of the serine proteinase domains and analysis of intron-
exon boundaries and Kringle sequences indicate that hepatocyte
growth factor/scatter factor (HGF/SF), hepatocyte growth factor-
like/macrophage stimulating protein (HGFVMSP), plasminogen, and
apolipoprotein (a) have evolved from a common ancestral gene. The
name Kringle comes from the Scandinavian pastry that these
structures resemble.
322. Acetyl CoA Carboxylase is stimulated by
     -
 a) Starvation

 b) Glucagon

 c) Citrate

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Citrate [Ref Harper 29th/e p. 219]
                            Activator Inhibitor
Allosteric (palmitoyl CoA)Citrate     Long chain acyl-CoA
Covalent                    Insulin   Glucagon, epinephrine
323. Which of the following enzyme is not a
     component of fatty acid synthase
     complex?
 a) Acetyl Co-A carboxylase

 b) Ketoacyl synthase

 c) Enoyl reductase

 d) Acetoacetyl



Correct Answer - A
 The Fatty Acid Synthase Complex Is a Homodimer of Two
Polypeptide Chains Containing Six Enzyme Activities and the Acyl
Carrier Protein.
The 6 enzymes are-
Ketoacyl synthase
Ketoacyl reductase
Malonyl transacylase
Dehydratase
Enoyl reductase
Thioesterase
Acetyl Co-A carboxylase is the rate-limiting enzyme of fatty acid
synthesis and is an enzyme, which is not a component of fatty acid
synthase complex.
  324. Cholesterol is not a precursor for
       synthesis of -
    a) Vitamin D

    b) Progesterone

    c) Bile acids

    d) Lipocortin



   Correct Answer - D
   Ans. is 'd' i.e., Lipocortin
   Cholesterol is an important precursor for the synthesis of :-
1. Steroid hormones:- Progesterone, estrogen„ androgens,
   glucocorticoids, mineralocorticoids
2. Vitamin D
3. Bile acids
325. HDL is called good cholesterol because -
 a) Removes cholesterol from extrahepatic tissues

 b) Causes transport of cholesterol to extrahepatic tissues

 c) Stimulate hepatic TGs synthesis

 d) Activates lipoprotein lipase



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Removes cholesterol from extrahepatic tissues
The HDL particles are referred to as scavengers because their
primary role is to remove free (unesterified) cholesterol from
extrahepatic tissues, which is then excreted through bile. This is a
crucial mechanism that prevents the inappropriate accumulation of
cholesterol in peripheral tissues. Because accumulation of
cholesterol in tissues is strongly associated with the development of
atherosclerosis, the level of HDL in serum is inversely related to the
incidence of MI (myocardial infarction). Thus, HDL is
cardioprotective and anti-atherogenic in nature, and is referred to as
"good cholesterol".
Therefore, HDL-Cholesterol appears to be the best independent
predictor of coronary artery disease (inverse relationship) than any
other known risk factor. That means low HDL is a much stronger
predictor of coronary artery disease than increased LDL cholesterol
or increased total cholesterol.
326.
Amide group is present in which part of
protein -
 a) Amino-terminal

 b) Carboxy-terminal

 c) Peptide bond

 d) Disulfide bond



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Peptide bond [Ref Text book of biochemistry by
Talwar - p. 30]
A peptide bond is a chemical bond that connects amino acids to
each other.
A peptide bond essentially results from a dehydration synthesis
reaction.
It is formed between two amino acids when the carboxyl group of
one amino acid reacts with the amino group of the other, releasing a
molecule of water (H20).
Peptide bond is the resulting CO-NH bond and the resulting
molecule is an amide.
The four-atom functional group - C (=0) NH- is called an amide
group or peptide group.
Peptide bond is a partial double bond.
Partial double bond nature renders the amide group planar and rigid,
making all the atoms that are involved in the peptide bond lie in a flat
plane.
327. Non- essential amino-acids are all except
     -
 a) Basic amino acids

 b) Acidic amino acids

 c) Neutral amino acids

 d) None of the above



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Basic amino acids [Ref Harper 29th/e p. 266]
There, are three basic amino acids (Arginine, Histidine and lysine),
all of them are essential amino acids
Essential amino acids (PVT. TIM. HALL) : Phenylalanine, valine,
threonine, tryptophan, isoleucine, methionine, histidine, arginine,
lysine, leucine.
Among these, arginine and histidine are semiessential amino acids.
Nonessential amino acids : alanine, aspartic acid, aspargine,
cysteine, glutamine, glutamic acid, glycine, proline, tyrosine, serine.
Neutral amino acids: Alanine , asparagine, cysteine, glycine,
glutamine, isoleucine, leucine, methionine, proline, phenylalanine,
serine, threonine, tyrosine, tryptophan, valine.
Acidic amino acids (negatively charged or anion) : Aspartic acid
(aspartate), glutamic acid (glutamate).
Basic amino acids (positively charged or cation) : Arginine, histidine,
lysine.
  328. Amino acid which can be used in both
       gluconeogenesis and ketogenesis -
   a) Threonine

   b) Valine

   c) Tyrosine

   d) Arginine



   Correct Answer - C
   Ans. is 'c' i.e., Tyrosine [Ref Chatterjee 5''/e p. 448]
   Amino acids which can be used both in gluconeogenesis and
   ketogenesis (Both glucogenic & ketogenic amino acids) are :-
1. Tyrosine
2. Phenylalanine
3. Tryptophan
4. Isoleucine.
329. In phenylketonuria, diet restriction is
     advised for -
 a) Tyrosine

 b) Phenylalanine

 c) Maize

 d) All



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Phenylalanine, The main treatment is a
phenylalanine restricted diet for life.
   330. Guanidinium group is associated with -
     a) Tyrosine

     b) Arginine

     c) Histidine

     d) Lysine



    Correct Answer - B
    Some amino acids contain a special functional group in their
    side chain which provides some specific functions to that
    amino acids. These are
 1. Hydroxyl group in serine and threonine
 2. Indole ring in tryptophan
 3. Amide group in aspargine and glutamine
 4. 13-Carboxyl in glutamic acid
 5. Thioether in methionine
 6. Imidazole in histidine
 7. Sulfhydryl in cysteine
 8. Phenol in tyrosine
 9. y-carboxyl in glutamic acid
10. Pyrrolidine in proline
11. Guanidinium in arginine
12. c-amino in lysine
13. Benzene in phenylalanine
331. Creatinine is formed from -
 a) Glycine

 b) Lysine

 c) Leucine

 d) Histamine



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Glycine
Creatinine and creatine are synthesized from glycine, arginine, and
methionine.
Synthesis of creatine and creatinine
Creatine and creatinine are not amino acids, but specialized
products of amino acids. Creatine is synthesized from glycine,
arginine, and methionine. The synthesis starts with the formation of
guanidinoacetate from glycine and arginine in the kidney. Further
reactions take place in the liver and muscle.
332. Coenzyme for phenylalanine hydroxylase
     is -
 a) Tetrahydrofolate

 b) Pyridoxal phosphate

 c) S-adenosyl methionine

 d) Tetrahydrobiopterin



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Tetrahydrobiopterin
Phenylalanine metabolism is initiated by its oxidation to tyrosine
which then undergoes oxidative degradation
333. Glycine is required in formation of all
     except ?
 a) Heme

 b) Purines

 c) Glutathione

 d) Thyroxine



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Thyroxine
Glycine
lycine is a nonessential amino acid which is synthesized from serine.
Glycine is metabolized by following three pathways -
It can be converted to serine, a reaction that require tetrahydrofolate
(derivative of folic acid and pyridoxal phosphate as coenzyme.
Further serine is metabolized by serine dehydratase into pyruvate
and NH 4+.
The major pathway of glycine degradation is oxidative cleavage into
CO, and NH: by glycine cleavage complex of liver. H4 folate is
required which is converted to N5, N10-methylene H4 folate. Thus
folic acid is required for glycine metabolism.
Glycine may be oxidatively deaminated by glycine oxidase to
glyoxylic acid.
 Glycine is necessary for the formation of following products:- Heme,
purine ring, bile acids conjugation (formation of glycocholic acid, and
glyco-chenodeoxycholic acid), creatine, glutathione, glucose (by
gluconeogenesis).
334. Which of the following is required in the
     synthesis of acetylcholine -
 a) Inositol

 b) Carnitine

 c) Glycine

 d) Choline



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Choline [Ref Principles of medical physiology p.
96]
Acetylcholine is synthesized in the cytosol of nerve terminal from
acetyl-CoA and choline, in the presence of choline-0-
acetyltransferase
335. Most important factor which causes
     lactic acidosis in alcoholics -
 a) Pruduction of NADH

 b) Formation of acetaldehyde

 c) Production of acetate

 d) None of the above



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Production of NADH [Ref Pankaj Naik 3rd/e p.
351]
Excess intake of alcohol leads to excessive production of NADH with
a concomitant decrease in NAD..
The increased availability of NADH favours the reduction of pyruvate
to lactate and oxaloacetate to malate and decreasing its availability
for gluconeogenesis and decrease synthesis of glucose. This results
in Hypoglycemia.
Excess of lactate production leads to lactic acidosis
336. Respiratory quotient of carbohydrate is:
 a) 0.5

 b) 0.8

 c) 0.75

 d) 1



Correct Answer - D
Ans: D. 1
The respiratory quotient (or RQ or respiratory coefficient), is
a dimensionless number used in calculations of basal metabolic
rate (BMR) when estimated from carbon dioxide production. It is
calculated from the ratio of carbon dioxide produced by the body to
oxygen consumed by the body. Such measurements, like
measurements of oxygen uptake, are forms of indirect calorimetry. It
is measured using a respirometer.
The respiratory quotient (RQ) is the ratio:
RQ = CO2 eliminated / O2 consumed
337. Insulin dependant cells are -
 a) Pituitocytes

 b) Myocytes

 c) Adipocytes

 d) RBCs



Correct Answer - B:C
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Myocytes & 'c' i.e., Adipocytes [Ref Ganong
24th/e p. 435]
Insulin stimulates the uptake of glucose by myocytes (skeletal
muscle, cardiac muscle), adipocytes (adipose tissue) and
hepatocytes. Tissues that do not depend on insulin for glucose
uptake include brain, erythrocytes (RBC), the epithelial cells of
kidney & intestine, Liver, and Cornea & lens of the eye.
In the liver, insulin stimulates glucose entry into hepatocytes
indirectly by induction of glucokinase so that the glucose entering
the liver cells is promptly converted to glucose - 6 - phosphate
(glucose trapping). This keeps the intracellular glucose
concentration low and favours entry of glucose into the liver. Thus,
though the liver do not depend on insulin for glucose uptake, insulin
stimulates glucose entry into hepatocytes. That means glucose entry
can occur in liver without the action of insulin, but this is facilitated by
insulin. On the other hand, myocytes (skeletal and cardiac muscles)
and adipocytes (adipose tissue) are dependent on insulin for
glucose uptake.
338. Epinephrine increases free fatty acid
     level by causing -
 a) Increased fatty acid synthesis

 b) Increasing lipolysis

 c) Increasing cholesterol catabolism

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Increasing lipolysis [Ref Pankaj Naik %tale p. 248]
Epinephrine and glucagon accelerate lipolysis in adipose tissue by
activating hormone sensitive lipase. In starvation and diabetes,
glucagon is high (and insulin is low), leading to enhanced lipolysis.
339. Energy source used by brain in later
     days of Starvation is
 a) Glucose

 b) Ketone bodies

 c) Glycogen

 d) Fatty acids



Correct Answer - B
B i.e. Ketone bodies
340. Which of the following enzyme activity
     decreases in fasting?
 a) Hormone sensitive lipase

 b) Glycogen phosphorylase

 c) Acetyl CoA Carboxylase

 d) Phosphofructokinase I



Correct Answer - D
Ans: D. Phosphofructokinase I
Ans: D. Phosphofructokinase I
Phosphofructokinase 1 (PFK1) provides the first enzymatic step at
which a glucose molecule becomes committed to glycolysis and
therefore is subject to regulation (Nelson & Cox, 2008). PFK1
activity depends on the concentrations of AMP, ADP, and ATP
with allosteric activation by AMP and ADP and allosteric
inhibition by ATP.
In the fasting state, glucagon causes the liver to mobilize glucose
from glycogen (glycogenolysis) and to synthesize glucose
from oxaloacetate and glycerol (gluconeogenesis).
Glucagon stimulates an increase in cAMP, leading to an increase in
phosphorylation by protein kinase A.
The wave of phosphorylation that spreads through the liver cell
activates enzymes such as glycogen phosphorylase that are
involved in glycogen degradation while simultaneously inhibiting
glycogen synthesis.
Inhibition of glycogen synthase prevents futile resynthesis of
glycogen from glucose 1-phosphate (G1P) via UDP-Glc. Glucose-6-
phosphatase (G6Pase), a gluconeogenic enzyme that is present in
the liver but not in muscle, then converts G6P to glucose for release
into the blood.
Ref: Harper's illustrated biochemistry,3a,ed., pg. I88 and Lippincott's
illustratet! reviewsr 6't' ed., pg. 107
   341. Vitamin formed in the body -
    a) B 1

    b) B 3

    c) B 6

    d) B 12



   Correct Answer - A:B:D
   Ans. is 'b > a & d' i.e., B3 > B1 & B12
   This question is confusing one (Read text below).
   Niacin (Vitamin B3) is synthesized from tryptophan inside the
   body(endogenous).
   Some vitamins are also formed by bacterial activity in colon :-
1. Vitamin K
2. Riboflavin (Vitamin B2)
3. Vitamin B12
4. Biotin (Vitamin B7)
5. Thiamin (Vitamin B1)
   Thus, options a, b & d all are correct here. But the best answer
   among these is niacin as it is the only vitamin which is synthesized
   by proper anabolic metabolism.
342. Which of the following is not seen in 12
     days of fasting -
 a) Gluconeogenesis

 b) Ketogenesis

 c) Lipolysis

 d) Glycolysis



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is i.d.e., Glycolysis [Ref Harper 28'Ve p. 140; Dinesh purl
3'/e p. 414]
                               Intermediate      Late state {> 24
Duration      Early stage
                               stage (3-24 d) d}
                                                 Ketone body
              Glycogenolysis                     oxidation By brain
                               Gluconeogenesis
              Gluconeogenesis                    ↑↑
                               Lipolysis↑
Pathways Lipolysis                               By other tissues↑↑↑
                               Ketogenesis ↑
enhanced Ketogenesis↑                            Fatty acid
                               Ketone body
              Protein                            utilization↑↑
                               oxidation ↑↑
              degradation ↑                      Gluconeogenesis
                                                 ↑↑
                                                 Glycolysis
                                                 TCA
                               Protein
Pathways                                         Protein synthesis
                               degradation
slowed                                           and degradation
                               Protein synthesis
                                                 Glycogen synthesis
                                                 and degradation
343. Pyridoxine is required in -
 a) Glycolysis

 b) TCA cycle

 c) Glycogenesis

 d) Glycogenolysis



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Glycogenolysis [Ref Dinesh puri p. 187; Harper
29th/e p. 180 & 27th/e p. 159-160]
PLP is a cofactor for glycogen phosphorylase, hence it favors
glycogenolysis.
344. Pruritis [Itching] is caused by deficiency
     of -
 a) HMB synthase

 b) 5-ALA dehydratase

 c) Uroporphyrinogen - I synthase

 d) Uroporphyrinogen - III synthase



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Uroporphyrinogen - III synthase [Ref Rooks 7th/e
p. 12.7, 12.8]
Cutaneous (erythropoietic) porphyrias cause skin manifestations
like photosensitivity, rash and pruritus.
Among the given options, Uroporphyrinegen III synthase deficiency
causes cutaneous porphyria (Congenital erythropoietic porphyria).
  345. Vitamin acting on intranuclear receptors
       -
    a) Vitamin K

    b) Vitamin D

    c) Vitamin E

    d) Vitamin E



   Correct Answer - B
   Ans. is 'b' i.e.,Vitamin D [Ref Understandings medical
   physiology p. 408]
   Two vitamins are considered as hormones which act on
   intranuclear receptors (steroid receptor family). There are :-
1. Vitamin A (retinoic acid)
2. Vitamin D
   346. Which of the following has antioxidant
        property?
    a) Selenium

    b) Copper

    c) Zinc

    d) All



   Correct Answer - D
   Ans. is 'd' i.e., All
   The activity of the antioxidant enzymes depends on supply of
   minerals :?
1. Manganese
2. Copper
3. Zinc
4. Selenium
   Manganese, copper and zinc are required for the activity of
   superoxide dismutase.
   Selenium is required for the activity of glutathione peroxidase.
347. Niacin acts as coenzyme -
 a) TPP

 b) FAQ

 c) NAD

 d) NAD



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e.,NAD
Niacin, in the form of nicotinamide, is incorporated into the structure
of two coenzymes : nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD*) and
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADI)*).
348. Coenzyme not required in formation of
     glutamate-
 a) Thiamine pyrophosphate

 b) Pyridoxial phosphate

 c) Niacin

 d) None of the above



Correct Answer - A
Ans. 'A' Thiamine pyrophosphate
NAD+ is derived from nicotinic acid, a member of the vitamin B
complex, used in the synthesis of GABA.
During transamination reaction glutamate is formed. Pyridoxal
Phosphate acts as a coenzyme.
349. Not a metabolic product of urea cycle -
 a) Citrulline

 b) Ornithine

 c) Alanine

 d) Arginine



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Alanine
Metabolic products in urea cycle are carbamoyl phosphate,
ornithine, citrulline, argininosuccinate, arginine and fumarate.
Biosynthesis of urea occurs in five steps
1- Carbamoyl phosphate synthetase-I (CPS-I), a mitochondrial
enzyme, catalyzes the formation of carbamoyl phosphate by
condensation of CO, and ammonia.
2- Ornithine transcarbamoylase catalyzes the formation of citrulline
from carbamoyl phosphate and ornithine.
3- Argininosuccinate synthase catalyzes the formation of
argininosuccinate from citrulline and aspartate. This reaction
requires !ATP,
4- Argininosuccinate lyase (arginosuccinase) catalyses the cleavage
of argininosuccinate into arginine and fumarate. Fumarate enters
TCA cycle.
5- ) Arginase catalyses the formation of urea from arginine by
hydrolytic cleavage of arginine to yield urea and ornithine. Ornithine
is thus regenerated and can enter mitochondria to initiate another
round of the urea cycle.
350. Which amino acid is not involved in
     transamination -
 a) Alanine

 b) Aspartate

 c) Lysine

 d) Histidine



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e.,Lysine
Most amino acids undergo transamination reaction except lysine,
threonine, proline and hydroxyproline.
351. Boiled cabbage or rancid butter
     smelling urine is seen in
 a) Phenylketonuria

 b) Tyrosinemia

 c) Isovaleric Acidaemia

 d) Multiple carboxylase deficiency



Correct Answer - B
Tyrosinemia
REF: Sapira's art & science of bedside diagnosis - Page 138,
Textbook of Pediatric Emergency Medicine by Gary R. Fleisher,
Stephen Ludwig Page 1566
Tyrosinaemia is an error of metabolism, inherited, in which the body
cannot effectively break down the amino acid tyrosine, found in most
animal and plant proteins. It is an autosomal recessive, which
means two copies of an abnormal gene must be present in order for
this to develop. There are three types of tyrosinemia, each with
distinctive symptoms and caused by the deficiency of a different
enzyme. One of the symptoms of Tyrodinaemia type 1 is an odor
like cabbage or rancid butter.
352. Apo B48 is synthesized in -
 a) Liver

 b) Kidney

 c) Intestine

 d) RBCs



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e.,Intestine
It mediate uptake of LDL by LDL receptors of liver,
353. Allantoin is the end product of
     metabolism of ?
 a) Glycogen

 b) Purine

 c) Pyrimidine

 d) Histidine



Correct Answer - B

In non-primate mammals, end product of purine metabolism is
allantoin due to presence of enzyme uricase. Uricase convertes uric
acid to allantoin.
Humans lack the enzyme uricase. Therefore, end product of purine
catabolism in humans is uric acid.
354. True about sigma factor?
 a) Subunit of 50s ribosome

 b) Subunit of DNA polymerase

 c) Subunit of RNA polymerase

 d) Initiates DNA replication



Correct Answer - C
Ans- 'C' Subunit of RNA polymerase
The basic DNA-dependent RNA polymerase of the bacterium
Escherichia coli exists as an approximately 400-kDa core complex
consisting of two identical α subunits, two large β, and β′ subunits,
and a ω subunit. The core RNA polymerase, ββ′α2ω, often termed
E, associates with a specific protein factor (the sigma [σ] factor) to
form holoenzyme, ββ′α2σ, or Eσ.
Sigma factors have a dual role in the process of promoter
recognition; σ association with core RNA polymerase decreases its
affinity for non-promoter DNA, while simultaneously increasing
holoenzyme affinity for promoter DNA.
355. Replication and transcription are similar
     processes in mechanistic terms because
     both :
 a) Use RNA primers for initiation.

 b) Use deoxyribonucleotides as precursors.

 c) Are semi conserved events

 d) Involve phosphodiester bond formation with elongation
    occurring in the 5' - 3' direction



Correct Answer - D
D i.e. Involve phosphodiester bond formation with elongation
occurring in the 5'- 3' direction.
In both DNA and RNA synthesis, the general steps of initiation,
elongation and termination occur in 5'- 3' direction with the formation
of phosphodiester bondsQ.
   356. What are okazzaki fragments -
    a) Long pieces of DNA on lagging strand

    b) Long pieces of DNA on leading strand

    c) Short pieces of DNA on lagging strand

    d) Short pieces of DNA on leading strand



   Correct Answer - C
   Ans. is 'c' i.e., Short pieces of DNA on lagging strand [Ref:
   Lippincott's 5thie p. 399, 401, 406]
   DNA polymerases responsible for copying the DNA templates are
   only able to "read" the parental nucleotide sequence in 3' - 5'
   direction, and they synthesize the new DNA strands only in 5' -
   3'direction.
   Therefore, 2 newly synthesized chains must grow in opposite
   directions :?
1. The DNA chain which runs in the 3'45' direction towards replication
   fork as continued strand is called the leading strand. This requires
   only one RNA primer
2. The DNA chain which runs in the 5'43' direction away from the
   replication fork is called lagging strand. It is synthesized
   discontinously and requires numerous RNA primers. As the
   replication fork moves, RNA primers are synthesized at specific
   intervals. These RNA primers are extended by DNA polymerase III
   into short pieces of DNA called Okazaki fragments.
357. First purine nucleotide, which is
     synthesized in purine biosynthesis ?
 a) AMP

 b) GMP

 c) IMP

 d) UMP



Correct Answer - C

The biosynthesis of purine begins with ribose-5-phosphate, derived
from pentose phosphate pathway (PPP).
First intermediate formed in this pathway, 5-phosphoribosyl-
pyrophosphate (PRPP), is also an intermediate in purine salvage
pathway.
  358. C4, C5, N7 in purine ring are derived
       from -
    a) Aspartate

    b) Glutamine

    c) Glutamine

    d) CO



   Correct Answer - C
   Ans. is 'c' i.e., Glycine [Ref Harper 29th/e p. 332]
   In de novo synthesis, purine ring is formed from a variety of
   precursors is assembled on ribose-5-phosphate. Precursors for de
   novo synthesis are ?
1. Glycine provides C4, C5 and N7
2. Aspartate provides NI
3. Glutamine provides N3 and N9
4. Tetrahydrofolate derivatives furnish C2 and G
5. Carbon dioxide provides C6
359. Most important tool used in genetic
     engineering
 a) Halicase

 b) Topoisomerase

 c) DNA Ligase

 d) Restriction endonuclease



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Restriction endonuclease[Ref Satyanarayan p.
579]
Genetic engineering simply means manipulation of genetic material
to achieve the desired goal in a predetermined way.
Most important molecular tools in genetic engineering are enzymes
used in recombinant DNA technology. (also called genetic
engineering).
Most important of these enzymes is restriction endonuclease.
At the heart of genetic engineering is the ability to cut DNA
molecules at precisely defined sites.
This is usually done with purified bacterial enzyme, the restrication
endonuclease.
360. If content of A is 15%, what is the
     amount of G in DNA according to
     Chargaff s rule?
 a) 15%

 b) 85%

 c) 35%

 d) 70%



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., 35% [Ref Harper's Illustrated biochemistry 27th/e
p. 311-313]
Chargaff's rule:
Amount of purine = Amount of pyrimidine (A + G = T + C) Also
A+G+T+C= 100
Since A = T, Therefore 15 + G + 15 + C = 100
Since G = C, Therefore 30, + 2G = 100
2G = 70 4 G = 35
361. The gaps between segments of DNA on
     the lagging strand produced by
     restriction enzymes are rejoined sealed
     by:
a) DNA Ligases

b) DNA Helicase

c) DNA topoisomerase

d) DNA phosphorylase



Correct Answer - A
A i.e. DNA Ligases
362. cDNA from RNA is synthesized by -
 a) Helicase

 b) DNA dependent DNA polymerase

 c) Topoisomerase

 d) Reverse transcriptase



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Reverse transcriptase [Ref Satyanarayan 4th/e p.
550]
The enzyme RNA dependent DNA polymerase (reverse
transcriptase) is responsible for the formation of DNA from RNA.
This DNA is complementary (c DNA) to viral RNA and can be
transmitted into host DNA.
363. Which is not a chaperon protein -
 a) Calnexin

 b) Protein disulfide isomerase

 c) Calreticulin

 d) Calbindin



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Calbindin [Ref Harper 29thle p. 598-599 & 28th/e p.
497]
Some Chaperones and Enzymes Involved in Folding that are
Located in the Rough Endoplasmic Reticulum:-
BiP (immunoglobulin heavy chain binding protein)
GRP94 (glucose-regulated protein)
Calnexin
Calreticulin
PDI (protein disulfide isomerase)
PPI (peptidyl prolyl cis-trans isomerase)
364. All are functions of glycosaminglycans
     except -
 a) Lubrication

 b) Wound healing

 c) Anticoagulant

 d) Transport of lipids



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Transport of lipids [Ref Pankaj Naik 4th/e p. 29]
365. Bile salts help in absorption of fat by -
 a) Micelles formation

 b) Activation of transporter protein

 c) Creation of concentration gradient

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Micelles formation [RefGangong24th le p. 465]
Emulsification is the process which breaks down ingested fats
(mainly triglycerides) into smaller droplets so that they can be
digested more efficiently. Thus emulsification mainly helps in
digestion of ingested fats.
Micelles formation is the process in which digested fats (FFAs and
monoglycerides) are incorporated into much smaller droplets
(micelles) so that they can be absorbed more efficiently. Thus,
micelles formation helps in absorption of digested fats.
Detergent action of bile salts is necessary for both emulsification and
micelles formation.
366. a-aminolevulinic acid is a metabolic
     product in synthesis of -
 a) Tryptophan

 b) Collagen

 c) Glycosaminoglycans

 d) Heme



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Heme
Heme synthesis takes place in all cells, but occurs to greatest extent
in bone marrow and liver. The first step in the synthesis of heme is
the condensation of glycine and succinyl Co-A to form 6-
aminolevulinic acid (6-ALA), which occurs in mitochondria. This
reaction is catalyzed by 6-ALA synthase which requires pyridoxal
phosphate (PLP) as cofactor. This is the rate limiting step in heme
synthesis.
367. Which is an inhibitor of ferrochelatase ?
 a) Lead

 b) Mercury

 c) Iron

 d) Arsenic



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Lead [Ref Essentials of biochemistry 4thie p. 919]
Ferrochelatase, also called heme synthase, catalyses the last
reaction in heme synthesis.
Lead inhibits ALA dehydratase. Therefore, lead poisoning causes
inhibition of heme synthesis and excessive amount of 6-ALA is
excreted in urine. Lead can also inhibit ferrochelatase (heme
synthase).
368. Bile acids consist of all except -
 a) Lithocholic acid

 b) Taurocholic acid

 c) Deoxycholic acid

 d) Chendeoxycholic acid



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Taurocholic acid [Ref Ganong 22na le ch. 26]
Taurocholic acid is bile salt (not bile acid).
Bile acids are mainly presents as sodium or potassium salts which
are conjugated with glycine or taurine to form bile salts.
Primary bile acids are cholic acid and chenodeoxycholic acid, which
are synthesized from cholesterol in liver. In the intestine some of the
primary bile acids are converted into secondary bile acids, i.e.,
deoxycholic acid (formed from cholic acid) and lithocholic acid
(derived from chenodexoxycholic acid).
Glycine and taurine conjugates of these bile acids are called as bile
salts. For example, cholic acid is a bile acid, and its glycine
conjugate (glycocholic acid) is a bile salt.
369. True about cAMP and cGMP -
 a) Second messengers

 b) Act on membrane receptors

 c) Act by post-translational modification

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e.,All of the above
Second messengers
Second messengers are molecules that relay signals from the
membrane receptors to target molecules inside the cells. In above
described receptors second messengers are cAMP, cGMP,
Phosphatidylinositol, diacylgleceral, IP3, Ca.
Secondary messengers of membrane receptors act by
posttranslation modification, i.e., modification of proteins (e.g.,
enzymes) after they have already formed (i.e., after translation).
370. Spectroscopy is used for interaction of -
 a) Electromagnetic radiation

 b) Protons

 c) Alpha particles

 d) Positrons



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e.,Electromagnetic radiation
Spectroscopy is the study of the structure of atoms/molecules from
studying their interaction with electromagnetic radiation.
371. Abnormal proteins which are bound to
     ubiquitin are degraded in -
 a) Proteosomes

 b) Golgi apparatus

 c) Smooth ER

 d) Lysosomes



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e.,Proteosomes [Ref Harper 250/e p. 560-561 & 28th/e
p. 498-99]
Ubiquitin plays major role in degradation of proteins and is
particularly associated with disposal of misfoldedproteins.
It is small, highly conserved protein that plays a key role in marking
various proteins for subsequent degradation in proteosomes
372. Enzyme degradation is caused by -
 a) Ubiquitin

 b) RNAse

 c) Zymase

 d) Chaperone



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Ubiquitin [Ref Harper 29thie p. 560-561]
Degradation of defective (misfolded) proteins (including enzymes) is
caused by ubiquitin
373. G1cNAc-P-P- oligosacharride is -
 a) Proteoglycan

 b) Glycoprotein

 c) Collagen

 d) Phospholipid



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Glycoprotein [Ref Medical Biochemistry by
Bhagvan p. 312]
Dolichol plays a role in post-translational modification of protein by
glycosylation to form glycoproteins.
It acts in the form of Dolichol pyrophosphate (Dolichol PP) and
transfer Oligosaccharide from dolichol to glycoproteins
N-acetylgalactosamine-P-P-Dolichol (GLc NAc-P-P-dol) compound
formed in the bionsynthesis of lipid-linked oligosaccharides.
Dolichol -P-P acts as a carrier of oligosaccharide and transfer it to
glycoprotein.
374. Prolyl hydroxylase require which
     cofactor -
 a) Sc

 b) Vitamin C

 c) Mo

 d) Vitamin K



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Vitamin C [Ref Harper 29'Ve p. 590-593]
Hydroxylation of proline and lysine residue takes place during post-
translational modification in rough ER. The enzyme catalyzing the
reactions are prolyl hydroxylase (for proline) and lysyl hydroxylase
(for lysine). Both these enzymes are dioxygenases using molecular
oxygen (02) and cofactor for both these enzymes is vitamin C
(ascorbic acid). a-Ketoglutatrate is a coreductant, which is oxidized
to succinate.
  375. Side chain linkage in proteoglycons -
    a) Covalent

    b) Hydrogen bond

    c) Electrostatic bond

    d) Van-der Waal's force



   Correct Answer - A
   Ans. is 'a' i.e.,Covalent [Ref Essentials of biochemistry p. 712]
   Among the given options two bonds are involved in
   proteoglycan structure :
1. Covalent - In proteoglycon monomer, i.e. between central core
   protein and side chain of repeated disaccharides
2. Electrostatic→In proteoglycan aggregates between proteoglycan
   monomer and hyaluronic acid.
376. Which of following is not a free radical -
 a) H202

 b) (M?

 c) Superoxide anion

 d) HOC1-



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., HOC1– [Ref Principles in medical pathology p.
391]
Free radicals are chemical species that have a single unpaired
electron in the outer orbit. Most of these are partially reduced
reactive oxygen forms that are produced as an unavoidable
byproduct of mitochondria! respiration - also known as reactive
oxygen species.
The most important are hydrogen peroxide (1120), Superoxide anion
(02) and hydroxyl radical (OH).
377. Not an irreversible injury-
 a) Pyknosis

 b) Pyknosis

 c) Karyolysis

 d) Bleb formation



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Bleb formation
Damage to nucleus can be of three forms-
Pkynosis- nuclear shrinkage & chromatin condensation and
clumping.
Karyorrhexis- Nuclear fragmentation.
Karyolysis- decreased basophilia due to dissolution of nucleus.
378. Hypertrophy is -
 a) Increase in cell number

 b) Increase in cell size

 c) Decrease in cell number

 d) Decrease in cell size



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'B' i.e., Increase in cell size
Hypertrophy
* Hypertrophy refers to an increase in the size of cells without
increase in the number, resulting in an increase in the size of tissue.
* Hypertrophy involves cell enlargement without cell division.
* So, hypertrophied organ has just larger cells, but no new cells (by
contrast, in hyperplasia there is increase in number of new cells
without increase in size).
* Nuclei in hypertrophied cells have a higher DNA content than in
normal cells because the cells arrest in the cell cycle without
undergoing mitosis.
* Myocardium (heart muscle) and skeletal muscle undergo
hypertrophy.
* The most common stimulus for hypertrophy is increased workload.
Mechanism of hypertrophy
* The increase in cell size is due to synthesis of more structural
proteins.
* The genes that are induced during hypertrophy include those
encoding transcription factors (C-fos, C-jun), growth factors (TGF-(3,
TGF- 1, FGF); and vasoactive agents (a-agonists, endothelin-1,
angiotensin II).
* There may also be a switch of contractile proteins from adult to
fetal or neonatal forms, e.g., during myocardial hypertrophy, the a-
myosin heavy chain is replaced by 13-form of the myosin heavy
chain, which leads to decrease myosine ATPase activity and a
slower, more energetically economical contraction.
* In addition, some genes that are expressed only in embryonic life
are re-expressed in hypertrophied myocardium, e.g., in the
embryonic heart, the gene for Atrial natriuratic peptide (ANP) is
expressed in both atrium and ventricle. After birth, ventricular
regulation of the gene is down regulated. Myocardial hypertrophy is
associated with reinduction of ANF gene expression. ANP induces
salt excretion by kidney L blood volume & pressure, decrease work
load.
Why do these changes occur ?
* As already explained, the most common stimulus for myocardial
hypertrophy is increased workload.
* All the above morphological changes that occur in hypertrophy
either increase muscle activity (to handle the increased workload) or
decrease the workload to heart.
379. Hyaline degeneration is found in -
 a) MI

 b) Parkinson's' disease

 c) Yellow fever hepatitis

 d) Basophilic cell of pituitary



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Yellow fever hepatitis
1) Intracellular hyaline :councilman bodies in yellow fever
2) Extracellular hyaline :n Corpora amylacea are round masse of
hyaline seen in prostate in elderly, brain and spinal cord of old
people and old infarcts of lung.
   380. Programmed cell death is known as-
    a) Cytolysis

    b) Apoptosis

    c) Necrosis

    d) Proptosis



   Correct Answer - B
   Ans. is 'b' i.e., Apoptosis
   * Programmed cell death is apoptosis.
   * But remember this important fact that not all apoptosis are
   programmed cell death (read text below) Apoptosis
   * Apoptosis is pathway of cell death that is induced by a tightly
   regulated intracellular program in which cell destined to die activate
   enzymes that degrade the cell's own nuclear DNA, and nuclear &
   cytoplasmic proteins.
   * Apoptosis generally involves single cells in contrast to necrosis that
   usually involve a group of cells. o Apoptosis may be of two types ?
   A. Physiological (most of the time)              Programmed cell
   death.
   B. Pathological                                    Unprogrammed cell
   death.
   A.Physiological apoptosis
   * Death by apoptosis is a normal phenomenon that serves to
   eliminate cells that are no longer needed. o It is important in the
   following physiologic situation :?
1. The programmed destruction of cells during embryogenesis,
   including implantation, organogenesis, and metamorphosis.
2. Hormone dependent involution in adult, e.g., endometrial cell
   breakdown during menstural cycle, ovarian follicular atresia in the
   menopause, the regression of lactating breast after weaning, and
   prostatic atrophy after castration.
3. Cell deletion in proliferating cell population in order to maintain a
   constant number, e.g., intestinal crypt epithelium.
4. Death of host cells that have served their useful purpose, such as
   neutrophils after an acute inflammatory response, and lymphocytes
   at the end of an immune response.
5. Elimination of potentially harmful self-reactive lymphocytes in
   thymus.
6. Cell death induced by cytotoxic T cells to eliminate virus infected
   and neoplastic cells. Same mechanism occurs in graft versus host
   disease.
   B.Pathological apoptosis
   * Apoptosis may also be pathological.
   * When cells are damaged beyond repair, especially when the
   damage affects the cell's DNA, the irreparably damaged cells are
   eliminated : ?
1. Cell death produced by injuries stimuli —> Radiation and cytotoxic
   anticancer drugs damage DNA, and if repair mechanisms cannot
   cope with the injury, the cell kills itself by apoptosis. In these
   situations, elimination of the cell may be a better alternative than
   risking mutations and translocations in the damaged DNA which
   may result in malignant transformation.
2. Cell injury in certain viral diseases, e.g., in viral hepatitis.
3. Pathologic atrophy in parenchymal after duct obstruction, such as
   occurs in pancreas, parotid gland.
4. Cell death in tumors.
381. Which is activated for nuclear
     fragmentation in apoptosis -
 a) Caspases

 b) Apaf - 1

 c) Oxygen free radicals

 d) All



Correct Answer - A
Ans is 'a' i.e., Caspases
Caspases and endonuclease cause chromatin fragmentation in
apoptosis.
They are inactive, so first they should be activated.
Cytochrome 'c' binds with Apaf-1 and this complex activates
caspases.
Caspases cause fragmentation of chromatin and also activate
endonuclease.
About option 'b'
Though Apaf-1 helps in activation of caspases, it has no role in
chromatin framentation and It does not have two seprate forms
active or inactive. It just forms complex with cytochrome 'C' to
activate caspases.
382. In cell death, myelin figures, are derived
     from-
 a) Nucleus

 b) Cell membrane

 c) Cytoplasm

 d) Mitochondria



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Cell membrane
Myeline figures are cytoplasmic bodies composed of concentric
whorls of membranes, derived from damage cell membrane.
Myelin figures appear during reversible injury but they are more
pronounced in irreversible injury.
383. Lipofuscin is
 a) Wear and tear pigment

 b) Fat deposits

 c) Blood pigment

 d) Form of calcification



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Wear and tear pigment
It is an insoluble pigment, also known as I and wear or tear or aging
pigment. Lipofuscin is not injurious to the cell or its functions.
Its importance lies in being the tell-tale sign of free radical injury and
lipid peroxidation.
384. Antiapoptotic gene
 a) FLIP

 b) P53

 c) BAX

 d) BIM



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. FLIP
Proapoptotic genes : Apaf-1, Cytochrome C, Bak, Bax, Bim, AIF,
P53, Caspases, TNFRI, FAS (CD95), FADD, BH3 only proteins
(Bim, Bid, Bad), Smac/DIABLO.
Antiapoptotic genes : BCL-2, BCL-X, Mcl-1, IAPs, FLIP
385. In apoptosis which is/are involved -
 a) Apaf-1

 b) Bc12

 c) Caspases

 d) All



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Apaf-1; 'b' i.e., BCl2; 'c' i.e., Caspases
Proapoptotic genes : Apaf-1, Cytochrome C, Bak, Bax, Bim, AIF,
P53, Caspases, TNFRI, FAS (CD95), FADD, BH3 only proteins
(Bim, Bid, Bad), Smac/DIABLO.
386. Not a apoptotic gene
 a) P53

 b) Bax

 c) Mcl-1

 d) n-myc



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. n-myc
Proapoptotic genes : Apaf-1, Cytochrome C, Bak, Bax, Bim, AIF,
P53, Caspases, TNFRI, FAS (CD95), FADD, BH3 only proteins
(Bim, Bid, Bad), Smac/DIABLO.
387. Fat necrosis is common in -
 a) Omentum

 b) Breast

 c) Retroperitoneal fat

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - D
There are 2 Types of Fat Necrosis
1. Enzymatic fat necrosis
* This is due to action of lipase on adipose tissue.
* It occurs most frequently in acute pancreatitis due to leakage of
lipase.
* Depending on the severity of acute pancreatitis, fat necrosis may
occur in :
  - Adipose tissue contiguous to pancrease, i.e., retroperitoneal fat.
  - Adipose tissue in anterior mediastinum.
  - Bone marrow
  - Omental and abdominal fat
2. Nonenzymatic or Traumatic fat necrosis
* Occurs due to trauma
* Is seen in subcutaneous tissue of breast, thigh, and abdomen.
388. Caseating necrosis occurs in
 a) Brain

 b) liver

 c) kidney

 d) lung



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. lung
Gaseous necrosis, a variant of coagulative necrosis can be
encountered in any organ where cell death is attributable to certain
organisms e.g., mycobacterium tuberculosis (TB), syphilis and fungi
(Histoplasma, Coccidioidomycosis).
Pulmonary tuberculosis is the most common cause of caseous
necrosis. Therefore answer should be "lung".
389. Liquefactive necrosis is seen in:
 a) Heart

 b) Brain

 c) Lungs

 d) Spleen



Correct Answer - B
Brain
390. Spread of infection causes
 a) Fibrinoid necrosis

 b) Fat necrosis

 c) Liquifactive necrosis

 d) Coagulative necrosis



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Liquifactive necrosis
Liquefactive or colliquative necrosis occurs due to lysosomal
permeability and enzymes of leukocytes digest the tissue
transforming the tissue into liquid viscous mass.
Tissue architecture is lost.
Examples are- Infarct brain and abscess cavity.
391. MI is a type of -
 a) Coagulative necrosis

 b) Liquefactive necrosis

 c) Caseous necrosis

 d) Fat necrosis



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Coagulative necrosis
Coagulative necrosis
* This is most common type of necrosis.
* This type of necrosis is most frequently caused by sudden
cessation of blood flow (ischemia) in organs such as heart (MI),
Kidney (ATN), adrenal gland, and spleen.
Note : Brain is the only exception, i.e.,. It is the only solid organ in
which ischemia leads to liquifactive necrosis not coagulative
necrosis.
* It is also seen with other types of injury e.g., liver necrosis in viral
hepatitis, Coagulative necrosis of skin after burns (Thermal injury).
* Why there is predominant protein denaturation and no enzymatic
digestion ?
Hypoxia causes intracellular acidosis (has been explained earlier) —
> .t pH results in denaturation ofproteins which includes not only
structural proteins hut also enzymes
So, there is no enzymatic digestion. o The necrotic cells retain their
cellular outline for several days.
Liquefactive necrosis
* It is the necrotic degradation of tissue that rapidly
undergo softening and liquefaction because of the action of
hydrolytic enzymes.
* It occurs after
* It occurs after
1.Infection i.e., suppurative inflammation (most common).
2.Ischemic necrosis in brain.
Note : Brain lacks any substantial supportive stroma, so ischemic
necrosis in brain is liquifactive unlike other organs where it is
coagulative.
* Mechanism of liquefactive necrosis —> Microbes stimulates
accumulation of inflammatory cells and these cells release
lysosomal enzymes.
Caseous necrosis
* It is a variant of coagulative necrosis.
* It is most commonly encountered when cell death is attributable to
certain organisms e.g., mycobacterium tuberculosis (TB) and
fungi (Histoplasma, Coccidioidomycosis).
Why is it called caseous necrosis, not coagulative necrosis ?
* In contrast to coagulative necrosis where tissue architecture is
maintained, in caseous necrosis, the tissue architecture is
completely obliterated. So, it has been called caseous because of its
cheesy white appearance of the area of necrosis.
392. Diabetic foot is associated with following
     type of gangrene -
 a) Dry gangrene

 b) Wet gangrene

 c) Gas gangrene

 d) Fournier's gangrene



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Wet gangrene
When overlying skin of dry gangrenous tissue is devitalized,
bacterial infection is superimposed and the coagulative necrosis
is modified by liquifactive necrosis. More commonly due to venous
occlusion then arterial occlusion.
Occurs in diabetic foot and bed sores
393. Unfolded protein metabolism is
     associated with
 a) Endoplasmic reticulum

 b) Golgi apparatus

 c) Mitochondria

 d) None of the above



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Endoplasmic reticulum
The unfolded protein response (UPR) is a cellular stress response
related to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER).
Diseases amenable to UPR inhibition include Creutzfeldt-Jakob
disease, Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, and Huntington's
disease.
394. Most reactive free radical is:
 a) Peroxide

 b) Carboxyl

 c) Hydroxyl

 d) Superoxide



Correct Answer - C
Ans: C. Hydroxyl
(Ref Robbins 9/e p480)
Hydroxyl radical (*OH) is the most potent reactive oxygen species.
Most reactive oxygen-derived free radical.
Principal ROS responsible for damaging lipids proteins & DNA.
395. Not an example of excess tissue growth
 a) Granulation tissue

 b) Neoplasia

 c) Hyperplasia

 d) Fibrosis



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Granulation tissue
Granulation tissue is a hallmark of healing. It is characterized by
formation of new small blood vessels (angiogenesis or
neovascularization) and proliferation of fibroblasts
396. 1st mediator of inflammation to be
     released is
 a) Nitric oxide

 b) PAF

 c) Histamine

 d) IL-1



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Histamine
Vasoactive amines are present in preformed stores in cells and are
therefore among the first mediators to be released during
inflammation
The two amines are especially important. These are :- (i) Histamine
and (ii) Serotonin
397. Rolling of leucocytes on endothelial cells
     is mediated by
 a) ICAM-1

 b) (3, integrin

 c) IL-8

 d) P- selectin



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. P- selectin
Rolling & adhesion-
It is brought by- P selectin or CD 62
PECAM- 1 involved in leucocyte migration from endothelial surface.
398. Perioperative shock is an example of
a) Hypovolemic shock

b) Septic shock

c) Cardiogenic shock

d) Neurogenic shock



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Hypovolemic shock
"Most common cause of hypovolemic shock is hemorrhage which
may be intraoperative or postoperative."
  399. Substance playing a role in tumor
       metastasis cascade is
    a) Collagenase IV

    b) TNF-alpha

    c) CD99

    d) NM23



   Correct Answer - A
   Ans is 'a' i.e. Collagenase IV
   Various steps of metastasis and molecules involved
1. Detachment of tumor cells - Down regulation of expression of either
   E-cadherins or catenins
2. Attachement to ECM (including basement membrane) - Tumor cells
   express integrins that helps in the attachement.
3. Degradation of ECM - proteolytic enzymes (most important
   proteases are metalloproteinases (MMPs) including collegenase IV).
4. Vascular dissemination and homing of tumor cells - Among adhesion
   molecule CD44 is of particular interest.
400.
Which of the following is not a part of ECM ?
 a) Lectin

 b) Fibronectin

 c) Laminin

 d) Proteoglycans



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Lectin
Basement membrane (BM):- PAS positive amorphous structure
which lie underneath epithelia of different organs and endothelial
cells. Components of BM are laminin, fibronectin, tenascin, collagen
type IV, enatactin (nidogen), proteoglycan & perlecan (heparan
sulphate).
401. Which of the following is derived from
     fibroblast cells ?
 a) TGF-13

 b) MMP2

 c) Collagen

 d) Angiopoietin



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Collagen
Fibroblasts produce the glycosaminoglycans, collagens, elastic
fibers, reticular fibres and glycoproteins that can be seen in the
extracellular matrix. They also produce cytokineTSLP.
402. Chemotaxis is mediated by-
 a) Histamine

 b) Leukotriene B4 and C5a

 c) Leukotriene C4 and C3a

 d) Bradykinin



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Leukotriene B4 and C5a
Chemotaxis is unidirectional locomotion of leukocytes towards the
site of injury, oriented along a chemical gradient. This chemical
gradient is created by substances called chemoattractants
(chemotactic agents), which may be exogenous (bacterial products)
or endogenous (C5a, LTB-4, IL-I, TNF, IL-8).
C5a is the most powerful chemo-attractant (chemokine).
403. Which of the following enhances acute
     phase response ?
 a) a-2 microglobulin

 b) Transferrin

 c) Albumin

 d) Retinal binding protein



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. a-2 microglobulin
a) Positive acute phase proteins
These proteins are increased during inflammation. Important
examples are C-reactive protein : CRP (f31- globulin),
a-1 antitrypsin,fibrinogen, ferritin, serum amyloid A, hepatoglobulin,
ceruloplasmin, and a-2 microglobulin.
b) Negative acute phase proteins
These proteins are decreased during inflammation. Important
examples are albumin, prealbumin, transferrin, transcortin,
transthyretin and retinal binding protein.
Generally, positive acute phase proteins are considered as acute
phase proteins.
404. Interleukin responsible for Pyrexia is:
 a) IL1

 b) IL3

 c) IL4

 d) IL8



Correct Answer - A
IL1
405. Interleukin 2 is produced by
 a) T helper cells 1

 b) T helper cells 2

 c) Natural killer cells

 d) Basophils



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., T helper cells 1
A) T helper - 1 (TF,') secretes 4 IL-2 and interferon - y
B) T helper - 2 (T02) secretes -> IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, IL-13
406. Process of migration of leukocytes through the endothelium is through:
 a) Phagocytosis

 b) Pinocytosis

 c) Diapedesis

 d) Apoptosis



Correct Answer - C
The next step in the process of leukocyte recruitment is migration of the leukocytes through
the endothelium, called transmigration or diapedesis.

Transmigration of leukocytes occurs mainly in post-capillary venules.
Chemokines act on the adherent leukocytes and stimulate the cells to migrate through
interendothelial spaces toward the chemical concentration gradient, that is, toward the site
of injury or infection where the chemokines are being produced.

Ref: Robbins 8th edition, Chapter 2.
407. IFN-gamma is produced by
 a) Neutrophills

 b) Macrophages

 c) T - cells

 d) B - cells



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. T - cells
Activated T-cells (helper) produce IFN-y, the major cytokine of
granulomatous inflammation.
IFN-y
Helper T-cells are activated by IL-2 and produce IFN-y, the major
cytokine of granulomatous inflammation
Finally there is formation of granuloma induced by IFN-y.
408. Extremities are warm in which type of
     shock
 a) Hypovolemic shock

 b) Neurogenic shock

 c) Anaphylactic shock

 d) Cardiogenic shock



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Neurogenic shock
In hyperdynamic stage of septic shock and in neurogenic shock,
extremities are warm due to vasodilatation.
409. Serum amyloid associated protein, found
     in ?
a) Alzheimer's disease

b) Chronic inflammatory states

c) Chronic renal failure

d) Malignant hypertension



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Chronic inflammatory states
a) Chronic inflammatory conditions like RA (most common), TB &
leprosy, osteomyelitis, ankylosing spondylitis, IBD
(Crohn's disease, UC), bronchiectasis.
Some tumors like Renal cell carcinoma (hypernephroma), Hodgkins
lymphoma
410. HLA-Cw6 is associated with
 a) Myatshenia gravis

 b) Behcet's disease

 c) Pemphigus vulgaris

 d) Psoriasis vulgaris



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Psoriasis vulgaris
HLA association in psoriasis
Psoriasis vulgaris - Cw6, B13, B17, DRB1*0701/2, B37
Psoriatic arthritis - B27
Generalized pustular psoriasis and acrodermatitis continua of
Hallopeau- B27, B8
Pustolosis of palms and soles - Aw19, Bw35
411. Following injection of lymphokines, the
     same class of immunoglobulin are
     produced. This is to be referred as -
 a) Group switching

 b) Clonal selection

 c) Hybridisation

 d) Class switching



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Clonal selection
* B-cells are able to make a specific antibody against a specific
antigen.
* It is due to present of specific receptor on B-cells - B-cell receptor
(BCR), that is usually an immunoglobulin Ig M or Ig D.
* An antigen interacts with B-cell that shows best fit by virtue of its
BCR.
* The antigen binds to this receptor, and the B-cell is stimulated to
divide and form a clone (clonal selection).
* This clone of cells will become plasma cells that will secretes
antibody of a particular specificity and same class.
* Although, B-cells are the major source of antibodies (after their
conversion into plasma cells), Helper - T cells are alsoimportant.
* Helper T-cells activate B-cells by secreting cytokines
(lymphokines). o In antibody formation T-cells are involved earlier
than B-cells.
                             Antigen exposure
     Antigen presenting cells present this antigen to helper T cells
                            T cells are activated
                   Secretion of lymphokine by T-cells
B-cells that carry BCR specific to that antigen are, stimulated (clonal
                                selection)
         B-cells proliferate and differentiate in to plasma cells
  Plasma cells synthesize an immunoglobulin of same specificity as
                  that carried by the B-cell precursors
Also know
Class switching
* Isotype or class switching is a biological process that changes an
antibody from one class to another. For example from Ig M (in
primary response) to Ig G (in secondary response).
412. Shrinking Lung Syndrome is seen in:
 a) SLE

 b) Rheumatoid Arthritis

 c) Scleroderma

 d) Sarcoidosis



Correct Answer - A
Answer is A (SLE):
Shrinking lung syndrome refers to a condition typical of SLE that
consists of a purely restrictive respiratory disease with normal lung
parenchyma and markedly decreased lung volumes.
Shrinking lung syndrome
Shrinking lung syndrome refers to a condition typical of SLE that consists of a pure
respiratory disease with normal lung parenchyma and markedly decreased lung vo
Pathogentic Mechanism
Diaphragmatic dysfunction has been advocated as the main pathogenetic mechani
shrinking lung syndrome
Clinical Presentation
Shrinking lung syndrome usually manifests as exertional dyspnea of variable sever
progress over a period of weeks or months. (Orthopnea attributed to diaphragmatic
may also occur).
Pleuritic chest pain is reported frequently, and a previous history of pleurisy and pe
common.
Physical examination is remarkably normal.
Investigations
Chest radiography typically shows elevated hemi-diaphragms, although this is not a
finding and its absence does not exclude the diagnosis. Pleural effusions, Pleural t
atelectasis may be also evident on plain films or CT scans.
Pulmonary function tests show a marked restrictive pattern, with decreased forced
Pulmonary function tests show a marked restrictive pattern, with decreased forced
(FVC).
Carbon monoxide diffusion corrected by lung volumes is typically normal.
Anti-Ro antibodies may be present, although they do not offer an additional diagno
Prognosis
The prognosis of this syndrome is usually good (Most patients show long-term stab
413. MHC-2 is present in all except
 a) Cortical macrophages

 b) Medullary m acrophages

 c) Cortical epithelial cells

 d) Medullary epithelial cells



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Medullary m acrophages
Cortical macrophages, epithelial cells and dendritic cells express
high level of class II MHC molecule. Medullary macrophages
express only class I MHC, while medullary epithelial cells and
dendritic cells express both class I & II MHC molecules.
   414. B cells are located in which region of
        lymph nodes
    a) Paracortical region

    b) Cortical follicles

    c) Medullar sinuses

    d) Subcapsular region



   Correct Answer - B
   Answer- B. Cortical follicles
   Location of immune cells in lymph node :
1. T-cells : Paracortical area.
2. B-cells : Cortical follicles, germinal centers, medullary cords.
415. PSGN is an example of which type of
     hyper sensitivity
 a) Type -1 hypersensitivity

 b) Type -2 hypersensitivity

 c) Type -3 hypersensitivity

 d) Type -4 hypersensitivity



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Type -3 hypersensitivity
Glomerulonephritis (PSGN : Post-streptococal GN) is a type III
hypersensitivity.
416. Number of criteria for HLA matching are
 a) 10

 b) 4

 c) 16

 d) 22



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. 10
At least 8 HLA markers for these minimum requirements: two A
markers, two B markers, two C markers, and two DRB1 markers.
Sometimes an additional marker, called DQ, is also matched making
it 10 markers.
417. Organ with least chance of rejection
 a) Blood

 b) Kidney

 c) Heart

 d) Liver



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Liver
HLA matching play a very minimal role in liver transplant therefore
immune rejection is less common in liver transplant.
418. Mc type of graft rejection is
 a) Hyperacute

 b) Acute

 c) Chronic

 d) Acute on chronic



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Chronic
"Acute graft rejection is the most common form"
419. True about serum sickness is
 a) Type 2 hypersensitivity

 b) Can lead to leukocytoclastic vasculitis

 c) Hypercomplementemia

 d) Can occur due to homologous antigen



Correct Answer - B
Answe- B. Can lead to leukocytoclastic vasculitis
Serum sickness is a type III hypersensitivity (immune complex
mediated) reaction that results from the injection of heterologous or
foreign protein or serum.
When an antiserum is given, the human immune system can
mistake the proteins present for harmful antigens. The body
produces antibodies, which combine with these proteins to form
immune complexes. These complexes precipitate, enter the walls of
blood vessels, and activate the complement cascade, initiating an
inflammatory response and consuming much of the available
complement component 3 (C3). The result is a leukocytoclastic
vasculitis.
420. Most lethal combination is
 a) Autosomal monosomy

 b) Chromosomal monosomy

 c) Autosomal trisomy

 d) Chromosomal trisomy



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Autosomal monosomy
Autosomal monosomies (loss of one autosome) are incompatible
with fetal development and are not found in live births. Only
monosomy compatible with live birth is due to involvement of sex
chromosome, i.e. Turner syndrome (45 X).
   421. All of the following are true about Down
        syndrome except
    a) Incidence of Robertsonian translocation is 1:1000

    b) Extra chromosome is of maternal origin

    c) Most common cause is trisomy 21

    d) Mosaicism 21 has no association with maternal age



   Correct Answer - A
   Answer- A. Incidence of Robertsonian translocation is 1:1000
   Cytogenetics in Down's syndrome
1. Trisomy 21 : It is most common (95%) cause. Extra chromosome is
   maternal in origin.
2. Robertson tronslocations (t 22:21; t 14:21; t 15:21) : This accounts
   for 3% (3:100) of cases.
3. Mosaicism of 21 : This accounts for 2% of cases
4. Partial trisomy : Very-very rare
422. Hypophosphatemic rickets is
 a) AR

 b) AD

 c) XR

 d) XD



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. XD
X-linked dominant disorders
Vitamine D resistant (X-linked hypophosphatemic) Rickets.
Familial hypophosphatemia.
Fragile X-syndrome.
Incontinentia pigmenti.
Rett syndrome.
423. Chromosomal instability syndrome is
 a) Fanconi syndrome

 b) Ataxia Telangectasia

 c) Bloom syndrome

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., All of the above [Ref Talwar G P p. 855]
Chromosomal instability syndromes are a group of disorders
characterized by chromosomal instability and breakage.
There are :
1. Xeroderma pigmentosa               3. Fanconi syndrome
2. Bloom syndrome                    4. Ataxia telangectasia
  424. Structure of chromosomes is studied
       by?
   a) C-banding

   b) G-banding

   c) Q-banding

   d) Brd V-staining



   Correct Answer - B
   Answer- B. G-banding
   Metaphase cells are then fixed with methanol/glacial acetic acid
   mixture and stained by one of the several banding techniques :-
1. G-Banding (Giemsa banding) : It is used most commonly.
2. Other banding techniques : Q-Banding (Quinacrine banding), C-
   Banding (Constitutive banding), and R-Banding (Reverse staining
   Geimsa banding).
425. Location of gene on chromosome is
     identified by
a) Karyotyping

b) Genetic mapping

c) Microarray

d) Genomic imprinting



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Genetic mapping
A map of the human genome allows to understand where genes are
located.
426. Tyrosine kinase receptor is associated
     with proto¬oncogene -
 a) RAS

 b) MYC

 c) RET

 d) RB



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. RET
It is a growth factor receptor (receptor tyrosine kinase). RET protein
is a receptor for glial cell lined derived neurotrophic factor. RET is
normally expressed in parafollicular 'C' cells of thyroid, adrenal
medulla andparathyroid cell precursons.
Point mutation in RET protooncogenes is associated with MEN-2A,
MEN-2B, medullary thyroid carcinoma and Hirschsprung disease.
427. Reversible change from on cell type to
     other is known as -
 a) Hyperplesia

 b) Hypertrophy

 c) Metaplesia

 d) Dysplasia



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Metaplesia [Ref: Robbin's 9th/e p. 37 6,stye p 10]
Metaplasia is an adaptive change in which one adult (mature) cell
type is replaced by another adult (mature) cell. It is completely
reversible
428. Which is not a tumor suppressor gene ?
 a) WT-1

 b) Rb

 c) p53

 d) RAS



Correct Answer - D
RAS [Ref. Robbins 7th/e p 295]
RAS is not a tumour suppressor gene, it is an oncogene.
Normal growth and cell division is under the control of two types of
genes:
(i)    Protooncogenes
(ii) Tumour suppressor genes
Protooncogenes are the genes that normally control how often a cell
divides and the degree to which it differentiates. They allow cell
division at a controlled rate.
When a protooncogene mutates into, an oncogene it becomes
permanently "turned on" or activated even when it is not supposed
to be. When this occurs, cell divides too quickly which causes
cancer.
Tumour suppressor genes are normal genes that slow cell division.
A tumour suppressor gene is like the brake pedal on a car, it
normally keeps the cell from dividing too quickly just as a brake
keeps a car from going too fast.
When it mutates, cell division can get out of control.
Functions of tumour suppressor gene:-
Repression of genes that is essential for the continuing of the cell
cycle.
An important function of tumour suppression gene is repairing DNA
damage.
Every time a cell prepares to divide into 2 new cells it must duplicate
its DNA. This process is not perfect and copying error sometimes
occurs.
Fortunately, cells have DNA repair genes which make proteins that
proofread DNA.
But if the genes responsible for the repair are faulty then the DNA
can develop abnormalities that may lead to cancer.
If there is too much damage to a cell's DNA to be fixed by the DNA
repair genes, the tumour suppressor gene is responsible for
destroying the cell by a process called Apoptosis.
If the tumour suppressor gene is not working. cells with DNA
damage will continue to grow and can eventually become
cancerous.
 Examples of Tumour suppressor gene
              GeneCancer associated
 • TGF
                  Carcinoma of stomach
 Preceptor
 • E-cadherin Carcinoma of colon
 • NF-1           Neuroblastomas
                  Schwannoma and
 • NF-2
                  meningiomas
 • APC/13         Carcinoma of stomach
 catenin          colon,
                  pancreas, melanoma
                  Endometrial and prostate
 • PTEN
                  carcinoma
 • SMAD 2 and Colon, pancreas tumour
 • SMAD 4
 • RB             Retinoblastoma,
                  osteosarcoma
                  carcinoma of breast, colon
                  and Lung.
 • P 53           Most human cancers
 • WT-1           Wilms Tumour
 • P16            Pancreatic, breast and
                  esophageal cancers
               esophageal cancers
•   BRCA 1 and Unknown
•   BRCA 2
•   KLF 6      Prostate
429. Which of the following has tumor
     promoting effect?
 a) BRAC

 b) RB

 c) MYC

 d) p16



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. MYC
RAS, Mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase, VEGF, or Akt
430. CEA is
 a) Hormone

 b) Glycoprotein

 c) Enzyme

 d) Tumor associated protein



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Glycoprotein
Carcinoembryonic protein (CEA) is a glycoprotein.
431. CEA is increased in which non-
     neoplastic condition
 a) Hemolytic anemia

 b) Pancreatitis

 c) BPH

 d) Pregnancy



Correct Answer - A:B
CEA-Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA): CEA is also a glycoprotein
normally synthesized in embryonic tissue of the gut, pancreas, and
liver.
Their serum levels are high in cancers of the gastrointestinal tract,
pancreas, ovarian cancer and breast.
CEA levels are also elevated in certain non-neoplastic conditions
e.g. in ulcerative colitis, Crohn’s disease, hepatitis, and chronic
bronchitis, Alcoholic cirrhosis, smoking, pancreatitis, hemolytic
anemia
432. Carcinoma originating from glands is
     called
a) Basal cell carcinoma

b) Squamous cell carcinoma

c) Adenocarcinoma

d) Fibrosarcoma



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Adenocarcinoma
Benign tumor of glands → Adenoma.
Malignant tumor of gland → Adenocarcinoma.
433. Hematological carcinoma is commonly
     linked to
 a) Nicotine

 b) Benzene

 c) Lithium

 d) Alcohol



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Benzene
Benzene exposure is associated with leukemia.
434. Major contribution to cachexia with
     advanced cancer?
 a) Clathrin

 b) Histamine

 c) Interferon

 d) Tumor-necrosis-factor (TNF)



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Turnor-necrosis factor (TNF)
Patients with cancer commonly suffer progressive loss of body fat
which is accompnied by profound weakness anorexia, and anemia.
This wasting syndrome is referred to as cachexia.
o TNF produced by macrophages or some tumor cells is the most
important mediator of cachexia.
  435. Elastic fibers of tunica media are
       secreted by
    a) Fibroblast

    b) Endothelium

    c) Smooth muscle

    d) External lamina



   Correct Answer - C
   Amswer- C. Smooth muscle
   The blood vessels are made of three layers, called from the luminal
   side outward, the tunica intima, the tunica media and the tunica
   adventitia.
1. The tunica intima consists of an endothelium and any sub-
   endothelial connective tissue. It is separated from tunica media by
   internal elastic lamina.
2. The tunica media is the layer of concentrically-arranged smooth
   muscle. Smooth muscle cells have secretory capabilities and the
   tunica media contains varying amounts of collagen fibers, elastic
   fibers, elastic lamellae, and proteoglycans secreted by the smooth
   muscle cells.
436. Level of which of the following is not
     elevated in heart disease
 a) LDH

 b) 5-nucleotidase

 c) SGOT

 d) ALP



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. 5-nucleotidase
5-nucleotidase is elevated in liver disease, bone disease and
pregnancy.
ALP (alkaline phosphatase) is raised in congestive heart failure
437. Which protein is defective in dialated
     cardiomyopathy?
 a) Myosin

 b) Troponin

 c) Tropomysoin

 d) Dystrophin



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Dystrophin
Dialated cardiomyopathy occus due to defective cytoskeleton
proteins. Most important protein inovolved is dystrophin. Other
proteins affected are : (1) Desmin; (2) MLP Protein and (3) aP
crystalline proteins
438. Lines of Zahn are seen in -
 a) Heart

 b) Lung

 c) Liver

 d) Kidney



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Heart
Lines of Zohn → Characteristic of thrombi that is formed in heart or
aorta. They have visible and microscopic laminations produced by
alternating pale layer of platelets mixed with fibrin and darker layer
containing red blood cells.
   439. Small vessel vasculitis are -
    a) Classical PAN

    b) Wegner's granulomatosis

    c) Giant cell arteritis

    d) All



   Correct Answer - B
   Ans. is `b' i.e., Wegner's granulomatosis
   Inflammation of vessel wall is called vasculitis.
   o Of these systemic necrotizing vasculitis, several types affect the
   aorta and medium sized vessels, but most affect small vessels, such
   as arterioles, venules, and capillaries —> small vessel vasculitis.
   Large vessel vasculitis        Medium vessel
   vasculitis                    Small vessel vasculitis
   o Giant cell arteritis         o Polyarteritis nodosa            ANACA
   positive                   ANCA negative
   (Temporal arteritis)         o Kawasaki disease                   o
   Wegner's granulomatosis         o Bechet's syndrome
   o Takayasu arteritis          o Buerger's disease               o
   Microscopic polyangitis         o Hypersensitivity
   o Cogan syndrome                                                  o
   Churg strauss syndrome           o Urticarial vasculitis o Drug induced
   Following information have been added in Pie of Robbins
   o Following are small vessels vasculitis and are immune-complex
   mediated :
1. SLE                                           3) Cryoglobulinemia
2. Henoch schonlein purpoura                      4) Good-pasture disease
   o Following small vessel vasculitis are pauci-immune, i.e. there is
   paucity of immune complexes:
1. Microscopic polyangitis   3. Chrug-strauss
syndrome
2. Wegener granulomatosis
440. Heart failure cells are
 a) Neutrophils

 b) Macrophages

 c) Lymphocytes

 d) Basophils



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Macrophages
Heart failure cells are Hemosiderin laden alveolar macrophages.
Heart failure cells are a manifestation of pulmonary congestion and
edema (as seen in heart failure).
Rupture of dilated and congested capillaries may result in minute
intra-alveolar hemorrhages. The breakdown of erythrocytes liberates
haemosiderin pigment which is taken up by alveolar macrophages,
so-called heart failure cells, seen in the alveolar lumina.
441. Heart failure cells are seen in -
 a) Pulmonary edema

 b) Pulmonary infarction

 c) Pulmonary abscess

 d) PulmonaryTB



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Pulmonary edema
Pulmonary edema & pulmonary infarction can be differentiated by
the presence of heart failure cells in pulmonary edema.
Heart failure cells are Hemosiderin laden alveolar macrophages.
Heart failure cells are a manifestation of pulmonary congestion and
edema (as seen in heart failure).
442. Obliterative endarteritis in vasa vasorum
     is seen in -
 a) Hypertension

 b) Tuberculosis

 c) Syphilis

 d) SLE



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Syphilis
Obliterative endarteritis that involves vaso vasorum of aortais seen
in the tertiary stage of syphilis. It may lead to syphilitic aneursym
(leuetic aneurysm).
It usually affects the proximal ascending aorta, particularly the aortic
ring. Syphilitic aortitis may occasionaly involve the aortic arch or
descending aorta.
443. Concentric hypertrophy of left ventricle
     is seen in -
 a) Cong. bicuspid aortic valve

 b) MS

 c) AR

 d) HOCM



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Cong-Bicuspid aortic valve
Aortic stenosis causes pressure overload that results in concentric
hypertrophy.
o Congenital bicuspic aortic valve causes valvular aortic stenosis.
444. Which type of artery is most commonly
     involved in PAN?
 a) Muscular

 b) Pulmonary

 c) Skin

 d) GIT



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Muscular
Polyarteritis nodosa or classical polyarteritis nodosa is systemic
necrotizing vasculitis of medium sized muscular arteries, but does
not involve small vessels i.e., arterioles, venules or capillaries.
It typically spares the pulmonary circulation.
Renal artery involvement is the major cause of death.
445. Amount of blood loss in Stage I of
     hemorrhagic shock is -
 a) <10%

 b) <20%

 c) <30%

 d) <40%



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. <20%
Mild hypovolemia (stage 1)(< 20% volume loss) : Only mild
tachycardia is there with normal BP
Rapid loss of up to 20% of the blood volume, or slow losses of even
larger amounts, may have little impact in healthy adults; greater
losses, however, can cause hemorrhagic (hypovolemic) shock
446. hL/h blood group-
 a) lacks H- antigen

 b) lacks A-antigen

 c) lacks B- antigen

 d) Alloftheabove



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Alloftheabove
In Bombay blood group(h/h or Oh blood group) the precursor
antigen (H antigen) is absent, consequently A and B antigens which
are derived from modification of H antigen are not formed. Thus,
Bombay blood group lacks H, A and B antigen.
447. Normal Myeloid - erythroid ratio is -
 a) l:l

 b) 2:l

 c) 3:l

 d) 4:1



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. 3:l
Bone marrow is the major source of all hematopoietic cells
(proginator hematopoietic cells) in post-natal life. In normal adults,
ratio of fat cells to hematopoietic cells is 1:1. Ratio of myeloid to
erythroid is 3 : 1. Ratio of fat cells to erythroid cells is 4: I.
448. Distinguishing feature of reticulocyte is -
 a) Constitute 10% of the red cells

 b) No nucleus

 c) Smaller in size then RBCs

 d) Mature in lymPh nodes



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. No nucleus
Reticulocytes are immature red blood cells
Reticulocytes do not have a nucleus.
449. Life span of neonatal RBC ?
 a) 60-90 days

 b) 90-120 days

 c) 120-150 days

 d) 150-200 days



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., 60-90 days
450. What is true about sickle cell -
 a) Sickling occurs both in heterozygous and homozygous state

 b) Fetal hemoglobin facilitates Sickling

 c) Sickling is reversible with oxygenation

 d) Sickling Leads to decreased MCHC



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Sickling is reversible with oxygenation
Sickling of red cells is reversible initially, i.e., with oxygenation, HbS
depolymerizes and cell shape normalizes.
Repeated episodes of deoxygenation and sickling, membrane
damage occurs and cells become irreversibly sickled, and retain
their abnormal shape even when full oxygenated.
451. Warm antibody in AIHA is -
a) IgE

b) IgM

c) IgG

d) IgD



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. IgG
Warm antibody autoimmune hemolytic anemia is the most common
form of autoimmune hemolytic anemia.
Most causative antibodies are of the IgG class, sometimes IgA
antibodies are culprit.
452. Osmotic fragility test is commonly used
     for -
a) Iron deficienry anemia

b) Megaloblastic anemia

c) Hereditary spherocYtosis

d) Aplastic anemia



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Hereditary spherocYtosis
Increased Osmotic fragility-
Hereditary spherocytosis
Hemolytic anemia (acquired immune)
Malaria
Severe pyruvate kinase dificiency
453. Which of the following findings is diagnostic of iron deficiency anemia?
 a) Increased TIBC, decreased serum ferritin

 b) Decreased TIBC, decreased serum ferritin

 c) Increased TIBC, increased serum ferritin

 d) Decreased TIBC, increased serum ferritin



Correct Answer - A
Iron deficiency anemia is associated with increased Total iron binding capacity (TIBC) and
decreased serum ferritin ( storage form of iron)
Ref: Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 17th Edition, Page 631, 663; Davidson’s
principles and practice of Medicine, 20th Edition, Chapter 24, Page 1025-1027 &1030
454. Ristocetin testing von Willebrand
     disease shows?
 a) Increased agglutination

 b) Decreasedagglutination

 c) Normalagglutination

 d) No agglutination



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Decreasedagglutination
Adding ristocetin at a final concentration of 1.25 g/1 to platelet rich
plasma (PRP) of a patient with von Willebrand disease (VWD)
almost invariably results in a reduced agglutination of the platelets
compared to a normal PRP.
455. Shelf life of platelets to blood bank is
 a) 5 days

 b) 7 days

 c) 10 days

 d) 21 days



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. 5 days
Platelets are approved by FDA for stored upto 5days at 20-24
(RoomTemperature) because of risk of bacterial contamination.
456. Routine Rh typing includes testing?
 a) A antigen

 b) B antigen

 c) C antigen

 d) D antigen



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. D antigen
After ABO, the most important antigen in transfusion practice is D.
The D antigen is a member of the Rh system.
457. Following are seen in polycythemia vera
     except:
 a) Most common cause of polycythemia

 b) Increased erythropoietin

 c) Erythropoietin independent growth of red cell progenitors

 d) Intrinsic abnormality of hematopoietic precursors



Correct Answer - B
Polycythaemia vera (PV) is a clonal disorder characterized by
increased production of all myeloid elements resulting in pancytosis
(i.e increased red cells, granulocytes, platelets) in the absence of
any recognizable cause.
The term ‘polycythemia vera’ or ‘polycythemia rubra vera’ is used
for primary or idiopathic polycythemia only and is the most common
of all the myeloproliferative disorders.
Secondary polycythemia or erythrocytosis, on the other hand, may
occur secondary to several causes e.g. high altitude, cardiovascular
disease, a pulmonary disease with alveolar hypoventilation, heavy
smoking, inappropriate increase in erythropoietin (renal cell
carcinoma, hydronephrosis, hepatocellular carcinoma, cerebellar
hemangioblastoma, massive uterine leiomyoma);
clinical features:
headache, vertigo, tinnitus, visual alterations syncope or even coma.
Increased risk of thrombosis due to accelerated atherosclerosis.
Increased risk of hemorrhages due to increased blood volume and
intrinsic platelet dysfunction e.g. epistaxis, peptic ulcer disease
Splenomegaly producing abdominal fullness.
Pruritus, especially after a bath
458. Which of the following does not
     predispose to leukemia?
 a) Genetic disorder

 b) Alcohol

 c) Smoking

 d) Chemical exposure



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Alcohol
Etiological agents are radiation, chemicals (benzene, ethylene
oxide), smoking and drugs (alkylating agents, topoisomerase II
inhibitors).
  459. 'Hairy cell leukemia' is a Neoplastic
       proliferation of :
   a) T. cells

   b) B. cells

   c) Myeloid cells

   d) Macrophages



   Correct Answer - B
   Answer is B (B Cells)
   Wain' Cell is a rare hut distinctive B-cell neoplasm.
   Hairy cell leukemia review :
   Presentation is with a triad of :
1. Splenomegaly Q :often massive. However hepatomegaly is less
   common while lymphadenopathy is rare.
2. Pancytopenia Q and thereby, resulting infections.
3. Vasculitis like syndrome Q :Erythema nodosum and cutaneous
   nodules due to perivasculitis and PAN.
   Course : Hairy cell leukemia follows an indolent course.Q
460. AML best prognosis is seen with ?
 a) Acute myelo monocytic leukemia.

 b) Acute monocytic leukemia.

 c) Acute promyeloblastic lukemia (M.3).

 d) Erythro leukemia



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Acute promyeloblastic leukemia (M.3)
Acute promycloblastic leukemia
Also known as M-3
Associated with t(15:17)
DIC, chloromas common
Very responsine to retinoic acid combined with anthracylines.
M.7 (acute megakaryocytic leukemia) mostly seen in down
syndrome.
French-American-British (FAB) Classification of Acute Myelogenous
Leukemia
461. AML causing Gum hypertrophy ?
 a) M1

 b) M2

 c) M3

 d) M4



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., M4
In acute leukemias the clinical features are primarily seen
because of :
Replacement of normal cells of bone marrow by leukemic cells
resulting in anemia, thrombocytopenia, neutropenia. Infiltration of
leukemic cell in various extramedullary organs causing,
hepalomegaly, splenomegaly. Gum hypertrophy due to infiltration of
gums by leukemic cells is one such feature. It is characteristically
associated with AML-M5 and AML-M4 i.e. (acute monocytic
leukemia).
462. Radiotherapy induced radiation
     pneumonitis mediated by all of the
     following except -
 a) TNF-c

 b) PAF

 c) TGF-p

 d) NF-kB



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. PAF
Important mediators of Radiation induced pneumonitis are TNF-a,
TGF-I3 and Th2 cells cytokines (IL-4, IL-5, IL-6 & IL-13).
ml response(II,-2, IFN-y) is suppressed during radiation pneumonitis
463. Most common lung cancer in non-
     smokers is:
 a) Adenocarcinoma

 b) Squamous cell carcinoma

 c) Oat cell carcinoma

 d) None of the above



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A: Adenocarcinoma
Adenocarcinoma accounts for 40% of non-small cell lung cancers. It
usually originates in peripheral lung tissue. Most cases of
adenocarcinoma are associated with smoking; however, among
people who have never smoked ("never-smokers"), adenocarcinoma
is the most common form of lung cancer.
A subtype of adenocarcinoma, the bronchioloalveolar carcinoma, is
more common in female never-smokers, and may have different
responses to treatment.
464. Most common histological form of lung
     Ca that metastasizes is -
 a) Squamous cell CA

 b) Adenocarcinoma

 c) Alveolar-carcinoma

 d) Small cell carcinoma



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Squamous cell CA
Small cell carcinomas are the most aggressive of lung tumors,
metastasize widely and are virtually incurable by surgical means.
465. Most common tnre of renal carcinoma is
     -
 a) Clear cell type

 b) Chromophobe type

 c) Papillarytype

 d) Tubulartype



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Clear cell type
Clear cell carcinoma is the most common type of renal cancer
accounting for about 70% to 80% of the renal cell cancer.
466. Characteristic feature of IgA
     nephropathy -
 a) Serum compliment level is normal

 b) More common in old age

 c) It is a tFpe of membranoproliferative GN

 d) Gross hematuria presents after l0 days



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Serum compliment level is normal
Compliment level is normal in IgA nephropathy. It is common in
children. Gross hematuria is seen in 1-2 days. It is a type of
mesangioproliferative (not membranoproliferative) GN.
It is the most common type of glomerulonephritis world wide.
467. IgA nephropathyis not associatedwith?
 a) Focal Mesengial proliferation

 b) Gross hematuria within 1-2 daYs

 c) On immunofluorescence deposits contain both IgA and IgG

 d) Increased compliment level



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Increased compliment level
Compliment level is normal in IgA nephropathy. It is common in
children. Gross hematuria is seen in 1-2 days. It is a type of
mesangioproliferative (not membranoproliferative) GN.
It is the most common type of glomerulonephritis world wide.
468. Most common nephropathy associated
     with malignaneN is:
 a) Focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS)

 b) Minimal change disease

 c) IgA nephropathy

 d) Membranous glomerulonephritis



Correct Answer - D
Ans: D. Membranous glomerulonephritis
Most common nephropathy associated with malignancy -
Membranous glomerulonephritis.
In 25-30% - Associated with malignancy (solid tumors of breast,
lung, colon), infection (hepatitis B, malaria, Schistosomiasis), or
rheumatologic disorders like lupus or rarely rheumatoid arthritis.
Histopathology:
Electron-dense deposits along the epithelial side of the basement
membrane with effacement of foot processes overlying deposits.
(Ref Robbins 9/e p917-918; Harrison 19/e p1843).
  469. Irregular scarred kidney with pelvic
       dilatation is seen with -
    a) Chronicpyelonephritis

    b) Polycystickidney

    c) Renalarterystenosis

    d) Tuberculosisofkidney



   Correct Answer - A
   Answer- A. Chronicpyelonephritis
   Pathological changes of chronic pyelonephritis are :
1. Irregular scarring of kidney
2. The hallmarks of chronic pyelonephritis are coarse corticomedullary
   scars overlying blunted calyces; dilated pelvis and flattening of
   papillae.
470. Not true about Alport's syndrome -
 a) X-linked

 b) Autosomal dominant

 c) Nerve deafness

 d) Glomerulonephritis



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Autosomal dominant
o Autosomal dominant form also exist, but it is very rare. Thus,
among the given options, it is the best answer. o Other three options
are classical features of Alport's syndrome (see previous
explanations).
471. Subepithelial deposits in kidney are seen
     in-
 a) MPGN-1

 b) GPS

 c) PSGN

 d) All



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., PSGN
Glomerular deposits : (i) Subepithelial:
o Acute GN (like PSGN)
o Membranous GN
o Heyman GN
o RPGN
(ii) Sub endothelial :
(iii) Basement membrane :
(iv) Mesangium :
MPGN (Type- I)
SLE
o Acute ON (H' 1583)
o MPGN (Type II)
o Good pasture syndrome
o IgA nephropathy, HSP
Remember
o Anionic antigens form subendothelial deposits o Cationic antigens
form subepithelial deposits o Neutral antigens form mesangial
deposits
472. NotafeatureofPSGN -
 a) HTN

 b) Increased urea

 c) Increased creatinine

 d) Normal C3 level



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Normal C3 level
Complement level is decreased in PSGN. Other options are correct.
473. In follicular carcinoma chromosomal
     translocation is?
a) PAXS - PPARTI

b) RET - PTC

c) ALK - NMPI

d) IAK - TEL



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. PAXS - PPARTI
Follicular - PAX8- PPARrl translocation
474. Tau protein seen in ?
 a) Alzhiemer's disease

 b) Lewy body dementia

 c) Picks disease

 d) Amylodosis



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is `a' i.e., Alzheimer's disease
Alzhiemer's disease :?
There is atrophy of frontal and temporal lobes to variable extent and
severity.
The pattern of atrophy can often be predicted in part by the clinical
symptomatology.
The atrophic regions of cortex are marked by neuronal loss, gliosis,
and the presence of tau-containing neu​rofibrillary tangles
475. All of the following are features of
     granulomatous thyroiditis except?
 a) Hyperthyroidism

 b) Hypothyroidism

 c) Painless

 d) Giant cells on histology



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Painless
Clinical Features-
Painful enlarged thyroid, fever
Hypothyroidism
Malaise
Sore throat, pain referred to the jaw or ear.
Subacute thyroiditis is a self-limited thyroid condition associated with
a triphasic clinical course of hyperthyroidism, hypothyroidism, and
return to normal thyroid function
476. Sezary cells show which tlpe of nucleus -
 a) Pleomorphic

 b) Round

 c) Eosinophillic

 d) Cerebriform



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Cerebriform
Sezary cells are neoplastic T-cells found in sezary syndrome
(cutaneous T-cell lymphoma).
477. Prusian blue detects?
 a) Ferric iron

 b) Ferrous iron

 c) Glycogen

 d) Lipids



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Ferric iron
It is the classic method for demonstrating iron in tissues. The section
is treated with dilute hydrochloric acid to release ferric ions from
binding proteins
478. Lysosome with undigested particle
     inside is known as -
 a) Residual body

 b) Phagosome

 c) Phagolysosome

 d) Autophagosome



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Residual body
The lysosomes that pinched off from Golgi complex are called
primary lysosomes. After a primary lysosome has fused with the
vacuole or vesicle containing the material to be digested, it forms the
secondary lysosome. After the process of digestion has been
completed, a secondary lysosome forms the residual body.
479. The predominant isozyme of LDH in Lung is:
 a) LD-1

 b) LD-2

 c) LD-3

 d) LD-5



Correct Answer - C
Isoenzymes of Lactate Dehydrogenase: Lactate dehydrogenase is a tetrameric enzyme
and consists of four subunits. These subunits can occurs in two isoforms i.e. H isoform (for
heart), M isoform (for muscle).
LDH-1 (4H) - in the heart and RBCs
LDH-2 (3H1M) - in the reticuloendothelial system
LDH-3 (2H2M) - in the lungs
LDH-4 (1H3M) - in the kidneys, placenta, and pancreas
LDH-5 (4M) - in the liver and striated muscle
Normal value of LDH in serum is 100-200 U/L. LDH level is 100 times more inside the RBC
than in plasma, and therefore minor amount of hemolysis will result in a false positive test.

Ref: Harper’s Illustrated Biochemistry, 26th Edition, Page 57; Textbook of Biochemistry By
Vasudevan, 5th Edition, Page 53
480. Homer rosette is seen in -
 a) Neurobastoma

 b) Nephroblastoma

 c) Hepatoma

 d) Ependymoma



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Neurobastoma
Homer Wright rosettes
Homer-Wright rosettes are characteristic of neuroblastomas and
medulloblastomas.
May also be seen in -4 Primitive neuroectodermal tumors (PNET),
Pineoblastomas, Retinoblastomas
481. Neuroblastomas - good prognositc factor
     is ?
 a) N-myc amplification

 b) RAS oncogene

 c) Hyperdiploidy

 d) Translocations



Correct Answer - C
Answer is 'c' i.e. Hyperdiploidy
482. 'Flare' in Triple response is mediated by :
 a) Axon reflex

 b) Arteriolar dilation

 c) Histamine release

 d) Local hormones



Correct Answer - A
A i.e. Axon reflex
483. HDL receptor is -
 a) SR-BI

 b) LDLR

 c) HDLR

 d) SR-82



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. SR-BI
HDL is removed by HDL receptors scavenger receptor BI (SR-BI),
which mediate the selective uptake of cholesterol from HDL.
This receptor is most abundant in liver, ovaries and adrenal glands.
484. "Citron bodies" boat or leaf shaped
     pleomorphic organism in an exudate is
 a) Cl. welchii

 b) Cl. edematiens

 c) Cl. septicum

 d) Cl. tetani



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Clostridium septicum
Citron bodies and boat or leaf shaped pleomorphic bacilli with
irregular staining suggest CL septicum".
Clostridium
Clostridial species are :
Gram positive
Anaerobic (obligate anaerobe)
Spore forming
Bacilli
Motile by peritrichate flagella except C perfringens and C. tetani type
IV which are non motile.
Non capsulated except C. perfringens and C. butyricum which are
capsulated
Pathogenesis is due to exotoxin not endotoxin.
Clostridium botulinum causes botulism not gas gangrene.
Gas gangrene is caused by :
C. perfringens (80%) → C novyi
C. septicum               → C. histolyticum
485. Ghon's focus reflects:
     September 2005
 a) Miliary tuberculosis

 b) Primary complex

 c) Tuberculous lymphadenitis

 d) Post primary tuberculosis



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B: Primary complex
Only a very small percent of Mycobacterium tuberculosis (MTB)
infections result in disease, and even a smaller percentage of MTB
infections progress to an advanced stage.
The bacilli is engulfed by alveolar macrophages multiply and give
rise to a subpleural focus of tuberculous pneumonia, commonly
located in the lower lobe or the lower part of the upper lobe.This is
known as Ghon focus.
The Ghon focus together with the enlarged hilar lymph node
constitutes the primary complex.
Small metastatic foci containing low numbers of MTB may also
calcify.
However, in many cases these foci will contain viable organisms.
These foci are referred to Simon foci.
The Simon foci are also visible upon chest X-ray and are often the
site of disease reactivation.
486. Calrexin and calreticulin are -
 a) Glycoproteins

 b) Chaperons

 c) Tumor markers

 d) Enzymes



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Chaperons
Calreticulin & calrexin are major Ca2+ binding (storage) chaperones
in the endoplasmic reticulum.
487. Which of the following is potassium
     Channelopathy -
 a) Hypokalemic periodic paralysis

 b) Hyperkalemic periodic paralysis

 c) Episodic ataxia I

 d) Long QT-syndrome



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Hypokalemic periodic paralysis
Dent's disease (X linked proteinuria & Kidney stones)
Osteopetrosis (recessive or dominant)
Barter syndrome type III
Barter syndrome type IV (associated with sensorineural deafness)
Hyperkplexia (startle disease)
Juvenile myoclonus epilepsy
Epilepsy
488. COXtype 3 is a product of-
 a) COX I gene

 b) COX2gene

 c) COX 3 gene

 d) None ofthe above



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. COX I gene
The COX-3 isozyme is encoded by the same gene as COX-1
(PTGS1 gene), with the difference that COX-3 retains an intron that
is not retained in COX-1. It is not functional in humans.
489. Which of the following is false regarding
     carcinoid tumor ?
 a) Neuroendocrine tumor

 b) Most common site is lung

 c) Associated with serotonin production

 d) Potentially malignant tumor



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Most common site is lung
Carcinoid tumors arise from the neuroendocrine cells (Argentaffin
cells or Kulchitsky cells).
The majority are foundn GI tract, and more than 40% in small
intestine (jejunum & ileum). The tracheobronchial tree and lungs are
the next common sites involved.
Carcinoid tumors may rarely arise from the ovary or thymus
Carcinoid tumors are the most common malignancy of the appendix.
All carcinoids are considered to have malignant potential.
About 10% of carcinoids secrete excessive levels of a range of
hormones, most notably serotonin (5-HT), leading to carcinoid
syndrome. It is characterized by Flushing, Diarrhea, Wheezing,
Abdominal cramping, Peripheral edema
490. Fibrosis associated with liver cirrhosis is
     mediated by -
 a) PDGF

 b) IFN-y

 c) ICAM-1

 d) PcAM-l



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. PDGF
Most important mediators involved in liver fibrosis - PDGF, PAF,
MMPs, TNF-a, TGF-13 ,IL-1.
491. Solution currently used for liver
     preservation for transplant is -
 a) UW solution

 b) IGL solution

 c) Kyoto ET solution

 d) Ross Marshal Citrate solution



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. UW solution
UW solution has become the gold standard liver transplantation for
many years."
492. Skin involvement along with collar stud
     ulceration in intestine on radiography.
     Diagnosis is -
 a) TB intestine

 b) Ulcerative colitis

 c) Intestinal Amebiasis

 d) Crohn's disease



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Ulcerative colitis
Skin involvement can occur in Inflammatory bowel disease i.e. both
Crohn's disease and Ulcerative colitis.
Collar stud ulceration is radiographical sign of Ulcerative colitis.
ULCERATIVE COLITIS :
PATHOLOGY:
Colonic mucosal inflammation; rectum almost always involved, with
inflammation extending continuously (no skip areas) proximally for a
variable extent; histologic features include epithelial damage,
inflammation, crypt abscesses, loss of goblet cells.
CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
Bloody diarrhea, mucus, fever, abdominal pain, tenesmus, weight
loss; the spectrum of severity (a majority of cases are mild, limited to
rectosigmoid). In severe cases, dehydration, anemia, hypokalemia,
hypoalbuminemia.
COMPLICATIONS
Toxic megacolon, colonic perforation; cancer risk related to extent
and duration of colitis; often preceded by or coincident with
dysplasia, which may be detected on surveillance colonoscopic
biopsies.
biopsies.
DIAGNOSIS
Sigmoidoscopy/colonoscopy: mucosal erythema, granularity,
friability, exudate, hemorrhage, ulcers, inflammatory polyps
(pseudopolyps). Barium enema: loss of haustrations, mucosal
irregularity, ulcerations.
493. Which of the following markers is
     specific for gastro-intestinal stomal
     tumor (GIST) -
 a) CD 117

 b) CD 34

 c) CD 23

 d) S-100



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., CD 117
lmmunohistochemistry
o Following markers are present in GISTs:
i)     CD 117 (c kit)             —>95%
ii)   CD 34                      —> 70%
iii) Smooth muscle actin              5%
CD 117 (c kit) is considered the most specific marker
o CD 117 (c kit) immunoreactivity is the best defining feature of
GISTs distinguishing them from true smooth muscle tumors
(leiomyoma) and tumors arising from neural crest.
o Although CD 117 (c kit) is considered the most specific marker for
GIST, it is not pathognomonic of GIST as other tumors may also
express CD 117. These tumors include mast cell tumor, germ cell
tumors (seminomas), leukemias, malignant melanoma,
angiolipomas, and some sarcomas.
494. Primary hyperparathyroidism, phaeochromocytoma may be associated with
     which type of thyroid cancer?

 a) Medullary carcinoma of the thyroid

 b) Papillary carcinoma of the thyroid

 c) Anaplastic carcinoma of the thyroid

 d) Follicular carcinoma of the thyroid



Correct Answer - A
It is characterized clinically by medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC),
pheochromocytoma, and hyperparathyroidism. Approximately 70-
95% of individuals with MEN 2A develop MTC, 50% develop
pheochromocytoma, and 15-30% develop hyperparathyroidism.

Ref: Bailey and Love’s Short Practice of Surgery, 24th Edition, Page 802; Harissons
Internal Medicine, 18th Edition, Chapter 351.
495. Feature of microscopic polyangitis is:
 a) IgG deposits in kidney

 b) Bronchospasm

 c) Renal involvement in 80% of cases

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - C
Answer is C (Renal involvement in 80% of cases):
Renal involvement is seen in at least 80% ofpatients with MPA.
Renal involvement is seen in at least 80% of patients with MPA
Renal involvement is seen in at least 80% of patients with MPA -
CRDT Glomerulonephritis occurs in atleast 79% of patients –
Harrison
Microscopic polyangitis is not associated with IgG Deposits in
kidney
Microscopic Polyangitis is a pauci-immune glomerulonephritis.
Immunofluorescence and electron microscopy show no immune
deposits
Microscopic Polyangitis is not associated with bronchospasm
Asthma (bronchospasm) and Eosinophilia are features of Churg-
Strauss Syndrome and are typically absent in microscopic
polyangitis.
Features       H.S.                                       Churg-
               purpura Microscopic Wegner's               Strauss
                           Polyangitis Granulomatosis syndrome
Deposits in    -- nt (IgA
kidney         deposits)                                  -
Bronchospasm -             -
                                        -
(Asthma)                                                  +
Eosinophilia   -           -            -                 +
Eosinophilia   -   -        -        +
Predominant    -
                   p-ANCA   c-ANCA   p-ANCA
ANCA
496. First order kinetics is:
     September 2005
 a) Absorption of the drug is independent of the serum
    concentration

 b) Elimination of the drug is independent of the serum
    concentration.

 c) Elimination of the drug is proportional to the serum
    concentration

 d) Absorption of the drug is proportional to the serum
    concentration



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C: Elimination of the drug is proportional to the serum
concentration.
A 0-order kinetics has a rate which is independent of the
concentration of the reactant(s). Increasing the concentration of the
reacting species will not speed up the rate of the reaction. Zero-
order reactions are typically found when a material that is required
for the reaction to proceed, such as a surface or a catalyst, is
saturated by the reactants.
With first-order elimination, the rate of elimination is directly
proportional to the serum drug concentration (SDC). There is a
linear relationship between rate of elimination and SDC. Although
the amount of drug eliminated in a first-order process changes with
concentration, the fraction of a drug eliminated remains constant.
The elimination rate constant (Kel) represents the fraction of drug
eliminated per unit of time.
497. Alkaline diuresis in acidic drug
     poisoning is not done in ?
 a) Aspirin

 b) Methotrexate

 c) Morphine

 d) Phenobarbitone



Correct Answer - C
Ans.C. Morphine
Acidic drugs (barbiturate, methotrexate, salicylate) are more ionized
at alkaline urine and are not absorbed from renal tubules if the urine
is alkaline, and their excretion in urine is increased.
Therefore, alkalinization of urine is done by NaHCO2 in poisoning of
acidic ilrugs.
498. Post marketing surveillance included in
     which phase of drug clinical trial?
 a) I

 b) II

 c) III

 d) IV



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., IV
Surveillance after marketing, i.e. after the drug is out in the market is
a part of Phase IV of clinical trials. It includes follow-up of patients
taking the drug and adverse drug reaction (ADR) reporting as well
as looking for newer treatment indications
  499. Permission from DCGI [Drug controller
       general, India] is needed before which
       phase of drug trial?
    a) Phase 1

    b) Phase 2

    c) Phase 3

    d) Phase 4



   Correct Answer - A
   Ans,. A. Phase 1
   Following are the prerequisites for starting a clinical trial in
   India:-
1. Permission from DCGl
2. Approval from ethics committee
3. Mandatory registration on the ICMR maintained website wwwctri.in
500. CYP3A inhibitors is/are -
 a) Ritonavir

 b) Amiodarone

 c) Verapamil

 d) a and c



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Ritonavir; 'c' i.e., Verapamil
CYP3A4/3A5 inhibitors are
o Ritonavir               o Erythromycin          o Itraconazole       o
Troieandomycin o Verapamil
o Clarithromycin          o Azamulin             o Diltiazem       o
Ketoconazole
o Grapefruit juice (Furano coumarins)
501. Regarding efficacy and potency of a drug, all are true, EXCEPT:
 a) In a clinical setup, efficacy is more important than potency

 b) In the log dose response curve, the height of the curve
    corresponds with efficacy

 c) ED50 of the drug corresponds to efficacy

 d) Drugs that produce a similar pharmacological effect can have
    different levels of efficacy



Correct Answer - C
ED50 refers to Effective Dose of a drug needed to produce a particular response in 50%
of population. It is a quantitative measure of the potency of a drug. Smaller the ED50 value,
more potent is the drug.
Ref: Encyclopedia of Psychopharmacology By Ian P. Stolerman, Volume 2, Page 456
502. Volume of distribution of a drug is 500 ml
     and target concentration of drug in blood
     is 5 g/L. 20% of administered drug is
     reached to systemic circulation. What
     will be the loading dose of that drug -
 a) 1 gm

 b) 5 gm

 c) 12.5 gm

 d) 25 gm



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. 12.5 gm
Loading dose = (Target Cp * Vd)/F
Target concentration (Cp) = 5 gm/L
Volume of distribution = 500 ml = 0.5L
F (Fraction of administered drug reaches systemic circulation) =
20Vo = 0.2 5x0.5
So, loading dose = r2.5 gm
503. Volume of distribution depends upon all
     except ?
 a) Drug dose

 b) Plasma concentration

 c) Extent of absorption

 d) Half life of drug



Correct Answer - D
AnS. D. Half life of drug
After a drug reaches the blood, it may be distributed to various
tissues.
This is determined by a hypothetical parameter, volume of
distribution.
Volume that would accommodate all the drug in the body, if the
combination throughout was the same as in plasma is called volume
of distribution.
Or in simple words, it k the fluid volume that would be required to
contain all the administered drug in the body with a concentration
equal to plasma.
504. High volume of distribution depends on
     ?
 a) High plasma protein binding

 b) Lipid solubility

 c) Elimination

 d) Half life



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Lipid solubility
[Ref: Clinical pharmacology 3d/e p. 31]
It a drug has high volume of distribution (> 42L), the drug is thought
to be distributed to all tissues of the body, especially fatty tissue.
A given drug will have high volume of distribution, if it has:
High lipid solubility (non-polar drug)
Low rate of ionization
Low plasma protein binding
505. Drugs which is not metabolized by
     acetylation ?
 a) Dapsone

 b) Metoclopramide

 c) Procainamide

 d) INH



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Metoclopramide
Drugs metabolized by acetylation:
Sulfonamides (including dapson) r Procainamide
INH
Hydralazine
PAS
Clonazepam
506. True about drug metabolism ?
 a) Glucuronidation is phase I reaction

 b) Most common enzyme involved is Cyp 3A4/5

 c) Reduction is most common reaction

 d) Cytochrome p450 is involved phase-II reaction



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is'b'i.e., Most common enzyme involved is Cyp 3A4/5
(Ref: Katzung Ilth/e p. 55)
Cytochrome p450 enzymes are microsomal enzymes that are
involved in phase I metabolism of many drugs.
Most of the drugs are metabolized by Cyp 3A4 isoform.
Cyp 3 A 4/5 carryout biotransformation of largest number (nearly
5O%) of drugs.
507. Which is topical way of drug
     administration ?
 a) Inhaled steroid

 b) Transdermal patch

 c) Sublingual NTG

 d) Rectal diazepam



Correct Answer - A
Ans, A. Inhaled steroid
Inhaled Corticosteroids (used in asthma) have high topical activity.
They act locally to reduce inflammation and hyper-reactivity of
bronchial tree.
Transdermal patch, sublingual NTG and rectal diazepam are
systemic routes of drug administration.
508. True about transdermal drug delivery
     system are all except?
 a) Applied to chest, abdomen and back

 b) Drug is delivered at a constant rate

 c) Good option in emergency situations

 d) Fentanyl is used



Correct Answer - C
Ans, C. Good option in emergency situations
The micropore membrane in transdermal patch is such that rate of
drug delivery to skin surface is less than the slowest rate of
absorption from the skin.
This offsets any variation in the rate of absorption according to the
properties of different sites. As such, the drug is delivered at a
constant and predictable rate irrespective of site of application.
Usually chest, abdomen, upper arm, lowerback, buttock or mastoid
region arc utilized.
Transdermal patches of GTN, fentanyl, nicotine and estradiol are
available in India, while those of isosorbide dinitrate, hyoscine, and
clonidine are marketed elsewhere.
509. Physiological antagonists are ?
 a) Adrenaline and Isoprenaline

 b) Histamine and adrenaline

 c) Isoprenaline and propranolal

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Histamine and adrenaline
Physiological antagonists are those that produce opposite action by
acting on different receptors.
Example
Histamine causes bronchoconstriction via H1 receptors and this
action is antagonized by adrenaline which causes bronchodilatation
through beta 2 receptors (option d).
510. Receptor level antagonism is shown by ?
 a) Adrenaline and Isoprenaline

 b) Histamine and adrenaline

 c) Isoprenaline and propranolol

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - C
AnS. C. Isoprenaline and propranolol
Receptor antaoonists (Pharmalogical antaqonists)
Receptor antagonists are those drugs that blocks the action of
agonist by acting on same recePtors.
Example
Isoprenaline is beta1 & beta2 receptor agonist while propranolol has
antagonistic action on beta1 & beta2 recePtors (option 'c')
511. Fastest receptor mediated action is
     through ?
 a) Cell membrane receptors

 b) Intrinsic ion channels

 c) Enzyme linked receptors

 d) Intracellular receptors



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Intrinsic ion channels
Fastest acting receptors - Receptors with intrinsic ion channels
Slowest acting receptors – Intracellular receptors (receptors
regulating gene expressions/transcription factors) à Cytoplasmic or
nuclear receptors.
512. Side effects of clonidine are all except ?
 a) Xerostomia

 b) Sedation

 c) Impotency

 d) Diarrhea



Correct Answer - D
Ans,. D. Diarrhea
Adverse effects of clonidine are
(i) dryness of mouth (xerostomia), nose' eye, (ii) sedation, (iii) mental
depression' (iv) constipation and (v) impotency.
It has no effect on lipid profile.
513. Lipid insoluble (3-blokcer is -
 a) Timolol

 b) Carvedilol

 c) Pindolol

 d) Celiprolol



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Celiprolol
Lipid insoluble beta blocker:
Acebutolol
Atenolol
Bisoprolol
Betoxalol
Carteolol
Celiprolol
Esmolol
Nodalol
Sotalol
Labetalol
514. Nonselective a + 1 blocker is ?
a) Carvedilol

b) Timolol

c) Pindolol

d) Acebutolol



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Carvedilol
Combined alpha & beta blockers:
Carvedilol
Labetalol
Bucindolol
Bevantolol
Nipradilol
Dilevalol
Medroxalol
515. Non-selective Beta-blocker with
     sympathomimetic activity ?
a) Pindolol

b) Acebutalol

c) Nodalol

d) Metoprolol



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Pindolol
Beta-blockers with intrinsic sympatheomimetic (partial agonist)
activity:
Acebutolol
Carteolol
Pindolol(non-selective beta blocke).
Bipindolol
Oxprenolol
Penbutolol
Alprenolol
Labetalol
Celiprolol
516. Which of the following is non-selective
     3rd generation Beta blocker ?
 a) Betaxolol

 b) Celiprolol

 c) Carteolol

 d) Nadolol



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Carteolol
Non selective third generation beta-blockers are corteolol, Carvedilol
and labetalol.
517. Dopamine receptor with inhibitory action
     ?
 a) D5


 b) Di

 c) D2


 d) None



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., D2
Two types of dopamine receptors (D I , D2) were originally
described. Three more (D3, D4, D5) have now been identified and
cloned. All are G protein coupled receptors and are grouped into two
families:
Dl like: (Dl, D5) are excitatory
D2 like: (D2,3,4) are inhibitory
518. Action of M, cholinergic receptors ?
 a) Skeletal muscle contraction

 b) Acid secretion in stomach

 c) Decreased heart rate

 d) Salivation and lacrimation



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Decreased heart rate
Effect of cholinergic system on heart (e.g. decreased heart rate) is
through M2 receptors.
519. . Beta-blocker should be used with
     caution in patient of -
 a) Hypertension

 b) Glaucoma

 c) Conduction defect

 d) CHF



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Conduction defect
Partial and complete heart block
Beta 1 receptors increase conduction in AV node.
Beta blockers decrease conduction by reducing sympathetic drive
on beta 1 receptors - Worsening of block.
520. Antimuscarinic drug used in overactive
     bladder -
 a) Pirenzepine

 b) Trospium

 c) Tropicamide

 d) Atropine



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Trospium
Drugs used for overactive bladder:
Darifenacin, Solefenacin, Tolterodine, Trospium chloride,
Oxybutynin, Solifenacin, Flavoxate
521. Anti-cholinesterase with central action ?
 a) Neostigmine

 b) Physostigmine

 c) Pyridostigmine

 d) Edrophonium



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Physostigmine
Lipid soluble agents (organophosphates and physostigmine) have
more marked muscarinic and CNS effect; and stimulate ganglia but
action on skeletal muscle is less prominent.
  522. Contraindication of antimuscarinic drug
       ?
   a) Glaucoma

   b) Asthma

   c) Peptic ulcer

   d) Urinary incontinence



   Correct Answer - A
   Ans. A. Glaucoma
   Antimuscarinic (e.g.-atropine) drugs are contraindicated in:
1. Glaucoma
2. Benign prostatic hyperplasia
523. Maximum cycloplegic action of atropine
     is seen at ?
 a) 30-40 minutes

 b) 1-3 hours

 c) 8-10 hours

 d) 1-2 weeks



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. 1-3 hours
Atropine is a powerful cycloplegic and mydriatic agent.
Most potent cycloplegic available for optometrists.
Maximum mydriasis is reached typically in 30-40 minutes while
recovery may take a week or more.
Cycloplegia commences after 30 minutes of application, with marked
cycloplegia being reached in 1-3 hours.
The effect may last up to 6-12 days before normal accommodation is
restored.
524. One of the following is not a side effect
     of atropine?
 a) Blurring of vision

 b) Diarrhoea

 c) Urinary retention

 d) Confusion of elderly



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Diarrhoea
Side effects and toxicity of atropine
Dry mouth
Fever
Difficulty in swallowing
Constipation
Dry, flushed hot skin
Difficulty in micturition
Palpitation
Delirium
Dilated pupil
Photophobia
Blurred vision
Respiratory depression
Cardiovascular collapse
Psychotic behavior
Convulsion and coma
   525. Longest acting anti-cholinesterase -
    a) Pyridostigmine

    b) Ambenonium

    c) Edrophonium

    d) Echothiophate



   Correct Answer - D
   Ans. D. Echothiophate
   There are two basic categories of cholinesterase inhibitors:
1. Reversible inhibitors
2. Irreversible inhibitors
   The reversible inhibitors produce effects of moderate duration, and
   the irreversible inhibitors produce effects of long duration.
   Echothiophate is irreversible inhibitor à long acting.
526. Propranolol is used in ?
 a) Thyrotoxicosis

 b) AV block

 c) Cardiac arrest

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Thyrotoxicosis
Uses of beta-blockers:
Hypertension.
Cardiac tachyarrhythmias
Myocardial infarction
Classical angina pectoris
CHF
Dissecting aneurism
HOCM
Glaucoma
Thyrotoxicosis
Pheochromocytoma
CNS uses - Anxiety, essential tremor, migraine prophylaxis, alcohol
withdrawal.
Emergency management of symptoms of TOF.
Prophylaxis of bleeding in portal hypertension.
527. Maximum potassium loss is caused by
     which diuretics ?
 a) Furosemide

 b) Thiazide

 c) Acetazolamide

 d) Spironolactone



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Acetazolamide
For the same degree of natriuresis CAse inhibitors causes most
marked kaliuresis compared to other diuretics.
528. . Hyoscine is antagonist at which
     cholinergic receptor?
 a) Muscarinic

 b) Nicotinic

 c) Both

 d) None



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Muscarinic
Hyoscine (Scopolamine) acts by competitive antagonism of
acetylcholine at muscarinic receptors (Non-selective receptors).
It has little effect at nicotinic receptors.
529. Fenoldopam is used in the management of ?
 a) Hypertensive emergencies

 b) Congestive heart failure

 c) Migraine prophylaxis

 d) Tachyarrhythmias



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Hypertensive emergencies
Fenoldopam
It is peripheral, arteriolar dilator used in hypertensive emergencies
and post-operative hypertension.
It acts as an agonist of dopamine D1 receptors, resulting in dilatation
of peripheral arteries and natriuresis.
Fenoldopam increases intraocular pressure > should be avoided in
patients with glaucoma.
530. True about cardiac muscle fibers ?
 a) Digitalis decreases force of contraction

 b) Na+ - Ca+ exchanger requires ATP directly

 c) Na+-Ca+ exchanger acts to pump Ca2+ into heart muscle cells

 d) All are true



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Na+-Ca+ exchanger acts to pump Ca2+ into heart
muscle cells
3Na+/1Ca+2 exchanger
This pump transports Ca+2 in exchange of Na+.
When Na+ concentration inside the myocyte is high, Na+/Ca+2
exchanger cause efflux of Na+ out of the myocytes and in exchange
it causes influx of Ca+2 inside the myocytes.
Na+/Ca+2 exchanger does not require ATP to function, ions move
along their concentration gradient.
531. Side effects of amiodarone are all except
     ?
 a) Hyperthyroidism

 b) Peripheral neuropathy

 c) Skin discoloration

 d) Hyperglycemia



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Hyperglycemia
Adverse effects of Amiodarone
Thyroid dysfunction (Hypothyroidism or hyperthyroidism)
Bluish discoloration of exposed skin.
Peripheral neuropathy
Myocardial depression
Pulmonary fibrosis
Corneal microdeposits
Photosensitivity
Hepatitis
Thrombocytopenia (Major specific side effect).
532. Which among the following is renin
     antagonist?
 a) Losartan

 b) Benazepril

 c) Remikiren

 d) Imidapril



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Remikiren
Renin inhibitors: Aliskiren, remikiren, enalkiren.
Aliskiren, remikiren, and enalkiren are the drugs that inhibit the
enzyme renin.
So these drugs decrease the activity of RAAS causing a fall in blood
pressure.
These drugs can be used orally for the treatment of chronic
hypertension.
533. Antihypertensive drug causing erectile
     dysfunction?
a) Calcium channel blocker

b) ACE inhibitors

c) AT 1 receptor antagonists

d) 13-blockers



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. 13-blockers
Important drugs causing erectile dysfunction
Beta-blockers
Diuretics (especially thiazide)
Lithium
Clonidine
OCPs
TCAs & SSRIs
Sedatives/hypnotics
534. Thiazides cause hypercalcemia by ?
 a) Increased Ca" absorption

 b) Increased PTH secretion

 c) Decreased calcitonin secretion

 d) Decreased calcium excretion



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Decreased calcium excretion
Thiazides cause hypercalcemia by:-
Reduced urinary excretion of calcium due to a direct tubular effect or
ECF depletion with secondary increase in tubular reabsorption of
sodium and calcium, or both.
Increased bone responsiveness to the resorptive action of vitamin D
and PTH.
535. Drug affecting positive free water
     clearance without affecting negative free
     water clearance -
 a) Loop diuretics

 b) Thiazides

 c) Acetazolamide

 d) Amiloride



Correct Answer - B
Ans. b. Thiazides
Loop diuretics abolishes the cortico-medullary osmotic gradient and
blocks positive as well as negative free water clearance.
Thiazides decrease positive free water clearance without affecting
negative free water clearance.
536. Which of the following adverse effect of
     ACE inhibitors is not due to bradykinin ?
 a) Cough

 b) Angiodema

 c) Hypotension

 d) None of the above



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Hypotension
Bradykinin and sustance P are substrate for ACE.
ACE inhibitors increase level of these kinins by inhibiting ACE, which
is responsible for cough and angiodema.
Cough and angioedema are due to elevated bradykinin, caused by
inhibition of bradykinin/srbstance P metabolism in lungs.
537. Which ACE inhibitor in safe in renal
     failure ?
 a) Captopril

 b) Enalapril

 c) Benazapril

 d) None



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Benazapril
Benazapril conferrred substantial renal benefits in patients without
diabetes who had advanced renal insuficiency".
Benazapril is considered safe in renal failure.
538. Sympathomimetic drug which causes
     decrease in heart rate ?
a) Adrenaline

b) Isoprenaline

c) Noradrenaline

d) None



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Noradrenaline
539. Following are the side effects of
     thiazides except?
 a) Hypokalemia

 b) Hypocalcemia

 c) Hepatic coma

 d) Impotence



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Hypocalcemia
Following are the side effects of thiazides:
Hypokalemia
Acute saline depletion, hemoconcentration and increased risk of
peripheral venous thrombosis
Dilutionsalhyponatremia
Nausea omitting diarrhea
Rarely headache, giddiness, weakness, parethesias, impotence
Hearing loss
Rashes, photosensitivity
Hyperuricemia
Hyperglycemia hyperlipidemia o Hypercalcemia
Magnesium depletion
Aggravated renal insufficiency
Brisk diuresis leading to mental disturbance and hepatic coma
540. Spironolactone
     agent:
                    should NOT be given with the following pharmacological



 a) Chlorothiazide

 b) b-blocker

 c) ACE inhibitors

 d) Amlodipine



Correct Answer - C
Unlike most other diuretics, K+-sparing diuretics reduce urinary excretion of K+ and can
cause mild, moderate, or even life-threatening hyperkalemia.
The risk of this complication is greatly increased by renal disease (in which maximal K+
excretion may be reduced) or by the use of other drugs that reduce or inhibit renin (beta
blockers, NSAIDs, aliskiren) or angiotensin II activity (angiotensin- converting enzyme
inhibitors, angiotensin receptor inhibitors).
Since most other diuretic agents lead to K+ losses, hyperkalemia is more common when
K+-sparing diuretics are used as the sole diuretic agent, especially in patients with renal
insufficiency.

Ref: Ives H.E. (2012). Chapter 15. Diuretic Agents. In B.G. Katzung, S.B. Masters, A.J.
Trevor (Eds), Basic & Clinical Pharmacology, 12e.
541. Na*- K*- 2Cl- is inhibited by -
 a) Thiazides

 b) Acetazolomide

 c) Furosemide

 d) Amiloride



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Furosemide
High efficacy (high ceiling or loop diuretics - inhibitors of Na+ -
K+-2Cl- )
Furosemide
Bumetanide
Torasemide
Ethacrynic acid
542. For activity of antipsychotic, action is
     required at which receptor -
 a) M, muscarinic

 b) D1dopaminergic

 c) DZdopaminergic


 d) 5HT4 serotonergic



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. DZdopaminergic
Typical antipsychotic acts by blocking D2 receptors (D2
antagonists).
543. Mechanism of action of opioids ?
 a) Inhibition of cyclooxylgenase

 b) Inhibition of opioid receptors at spinal level

 c) Inhibition of opioid receptors at supraspinal level

 d) Inhibition of opioid receptors at spinal and supraspinal level



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Inhibition of opioid receptors at spinal and supraspinal
level
Opioids have both spinal & supra-spinal components for their
analgesic effects.
544. Opioid [morphine] causes ?
 a) Increased heart rate

 b) Increased muscle tone

 c) Mydriaris

 d) Respiratory stimulation



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Increased muscle tone
Morphine causes both stimulant and depressive effects.
On CNS stimulation (Cortical area and hippocampus) morphine
causes muscular rigidity & convulsions.
545. Beside depression, other use of SSRIs ?
 a) Erectile dysfunction

 b) Retrograde ejaculation

 c) Premature ejaculation

 d) Sterility



Correct Answer - A:C
Ans. A. Erectile dysfunction & C. Premature ejaculation
SSRIs are effectively used in premature ejaculation.
SSRIs can cause prolongation of preorgasmic plateau and thus
delay ejaculation.
SSRIs can also be used in erectile dysfunction secondary to
depression.
Other uses of SSRIs:
Depression (most common use)
OCD
Panic disorder
Social phobia
PTSD
Generalized anxiety disorders
Pre-menstural dysphoric disorders
546. Lithium causes all except-
 a) Polyuria

 b) Nephropathy

 c) Ebstein's anomaly

 d) Hyperthyroidism



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is d i.e., Hyperthyroidism
Lithium is known to exacerbate psoriasis and cause acne.
It is known to cause Ebstein's anomaly in children.
It also causes thyroid dysfunction, hypothyroidism and not
hyperthyroidism.
Lithium nephrotoxicity is well known.
547. Most common renal sequel of lithium
     toxicity is ?
 a) Nephrogenic DM

 b) Renal tubular acidosis

 c) Glycosuria

 d) MPGN



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Nephrogenic DM
Lithium associated renal toxicity
The use of lithium salts for the treatment of manic-depressive illness
may have several renal sequelae, the most common of which is
nephrogenic diabetes insipidus manifesting as polyuria and
polydipsia.
Lithium accumulates in principal cells of the collecting duct by
entering through the epithelial sodium channel (ENaC), where it
inhibits glycogen synthase kinase 3 and down- regulates
vasopressin-regulated aquaporin water channels.
Less frequently, chronic tubulointerstitial nephritis develops after
prolonged (greater than 10-20 years) lithium use and is most likely to
occur in patients that have experienced repeated episodes of toxic
lithium levels.
548. Drug(s) not given as transdermal patch:
 a) Fentanyl

 b) Diclofenac

 c) Morphine

 d) Clonidine

 e) Buprenorphine



Correct Answer - B:C
Ans.B,Diclofenac & C,Morphine
[Ref: KDT 7th/476
Transdermal fentanyl (Durogesic) has become available for use in
cancer/terminal illness.
Butrans skin patches contain buprenorphine an opioid pain
medication.
Clonidine transdermal delivery (patch) systems have been available
since the 1980
549. Antidepressant drug used in nocturnal
     eneuresis is:
 a) Imipramine

 b) Fluoxetine

 c) Trazdone

 d) Sertaline



Correct Answer - A
A i.e. Imipramine
Adverse effects ofTCAs
l. Anticholinergic - Dry mouth, bad taste, urinary retention, blurred
vision, palpitation, constiPation.
2. Sedation, mental confusion, weakness.
3. Increased appetite and veigfit gain.
4. Sweating andfinc tremer.
5. Decreased seizure threshold (clomipramine, maprotiline &
bupropion).
6. Postural hypotension > Marimum by amitripSline - Goodman &
Gillman 11/e p. 4j3.
7. Cardiac arrythmia; Maximum by amitriptyline and dosulpin.
550. Zonisamide acts on ?
a) GABA receptors

b) T type Ca2+ channels

c) Na+Channels

d) Cl- channels



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Na+Channels
Anti-epileptics causing prolongation of Na2+ channel
inactivation:
Phenytoin
Carbamazepine
Valproate
Lamotrigine
Topiramate
Zonisamide
551. Buprenorphine partial agonist at which
     opioid receptor?
 a) Mu

 b) Kappa

 c) Delta

 d) Lambda



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Mu
Buprenorphine is partial agonist on mu receptor and antagonist at
Kappa receptor.
552. Dexmedetomidine acts on which receptor for its
         analgesic action ?

 a) 5HT2A

 b) D2


 c) α2A

 d) D5



Correct Answer - C
Ans. 'c' i.e., α2A
Dexmedetomidine is a centrally active selective alpha (α2) agonist
that has been introduced for sedating critically ill ventilated patients
in intensive care units.
553. Adverse effects of phenytoin include all of the following
      except?

 a) Lymphadenopathy

 b) Ataxia

 c) Hypercalcemia

 d) Hirsutism



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Hypercalcemia
Phenytoin interferes with calcium metabolism by desensitizing target
tissue to vit. D, this causes hypocalcemia (not hypercalcemia).
At therapeutic level (10-20microg/ml) - Gum hypertrophy, hirsutism,
hypersensitivity (rashes, lymphadenopathy, DLE, neutropenia),
hyperglycemia due to inhibition of insulin release, megaloblastic
anemia, pseudolymphoma, hypocalcemia, Vitamin D deficiency and
osteomalacia, and teratogenicity (fetal hydantoin syndrome).
At toxic level (dose-related) cerebellar syndrome (ataxia, vertigo),
falling BP, arrhythmias, drowsiness, mental confusion, Gl symptoms
(epigastric pain, nausea, vomiting) and local vascular injury by iv
injection.
554. Which of the following drug is not used in the treatment of akathisia?
 a) Benzodiazepam

 b) Propranolol

 c) Trihexyphenidyl

 d) Haloperidol



Correct Answer - D
Akathisia refers to somatic restlessness which occur in patients treated with first
generation antipsychotics.
Among the options given haloperidol is an old generation antipsychotic which causes a side
effect of akathisia.
Drugs commonly used to treat akathisia are propranolol, benzodiazepines and
anticholinergics.

Ref: American Psychiatric Association Practice Guidelines for the treatment of Psychiatric
Disorders 2006, page 649
555. Benzodiazepine binding ste on GABA
     receptors is on ?
 a) y-subunit

 b) a-subunit

 c) β-subunit

 d) δ-subunit



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is'b'i.e., a-subunit
[Ref: Goodman (t Gilman 1I'h/e p. 405, 406; RecEttor subunit &
coffiplexes p. 168]
The exact subunit structures of native GABA receptors are still are
unknown, but it is thought that most GABA receptor are composed
of alpha, beta & gamma subunits that Coassemble with some
uncertain stoichiometry.
Binding site of GABA is on beta-subunit.
Benzodiazepine site is located on the a subunit but the stabilization
or completion of that site in the assembled. Structure also requires
the y subunit.
556. Which of the following is true?
 a) Glucocorticoids upregulate MHC expression

 b) Glucocorticoids activate T-helper cells

 c) Glucocorticoids activate cytotoxic T cells

 d) None of the above



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Glucocorticoids upregulate MHC expression
Glucocorticoids both inhibit as well as upregulate MHC expression
depending upon cells and species involved.
Dexamethasone increases MHC class 2 expression on human
endothelial cells and monocytes whereas it down regulates it on B-
cells.
Glucocorticoids have inhibitory effect on both T-Helper cells and
cytotoxic T cells.
557. Beta blockers used in thyroid storm
     cause ?
 a) Quick relief of symptoms

 b) Increased metabolism of thyroxine

 c) Blockade of thyroxine receptors

 d) Decreased synthesis of thyroxine



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Quick relief of symptoms
Non-selective beta-blocker:
Most valuable measure in thyroid storm.
In thyroid storm most of the symptoms are because of adrenergic
overactivity due to increased tissue sensitivity to catecholamines in
hyperthyroidism.
This increased sensitivity is due to increased number of p-receptors.
So, quick relief can be obtained by blocking receptors.
558. Aincreased
        47-year-old woman presents with complaints of nervousness and
                sensitivity to hot weather. She is diagnosed with hyperthyroidism
         and prescribed propylthiouracil. What is the principal mechanism by which
         this drug acts?

 a) Decreasing the efficacy of TSH binding to the thyroid TSH
    receptor

 b) Decreasing the rate of proteolysis of thyroglobulin

 c) Increasing the amount of 3,3',5'-triiodothyronine (reverse T3;
    rT3)

 d) Inhibiting deiodination of thyroxine (T4)



Correct Answer - D
Propylthiouracil works primarily by inhibiting the peripheral conversion of T4 to T3.
The thyroid extracts iodide from the plasma and, in an oxidative process, iodinated tyrosine
residues in thyroglobulin molecules. Monoiodotyrosine and diiodotyrosine are formed and
then coupled to produce either thyroxine (tetraiodothyronine, T4) or triiodothyronine (T3).

Proteolytic cleavage of thyroglobulin molecules leads to free T3 or T4, which is then
released into the circulation; T3 is several times more potent than T4. Peripheral
deiodination of T4 at the 5' position leads to T3 formation (mainly in the liver); this step is
inhibited by propylthiouracil.
Decreasing the efficacy of TSH binding, decreasing the rate of thyroglobulin proteolysis,
increasing the amount of rT3 formation, and inhibiting the uptake of iodide into the thyroid,
would all tend to decrease the formation of thyroid hormones in the thyroid itself.
559. Which of the following is an aromatase
     inhibitor?
 a) Tamoxifen

 b) Letrozole

 c) Danazol

 d) Taxane



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e. Letrozole
Aromatase inhibitors are of two types
o Type I (steroidal) aromatase inhibitor - They cause irreversible
inhibition of aromatase, e.g. Exmestane, formestane. o Type II (non-
steroidal) aromatase inhibitor - They cause reversible inhibition of
aromatasxe e.g. Anastrazole, Letrozole, vorozale.
560. Drug which is contraindicated before 2nd
      stage of labor is:
      March 2009
 a) Mifepristone

 b) Oxytocin

 c) Misoprostol

 d) Ergometrine



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D: Ergometrine
Drugs used for medical method of induction of labour are:
Mifepristone
Oxytocin
Misoprostol (Prostaglandins El)
Ergometrine is contraindicated in pregnancy, 1st stage of labour, 2nd
stage of labour before crowning of the head and in breech delivery
prior to crowning.
561. Which antithyroid drug crosses placenta
     ?
 a) Carbimazole

 b) Propylthiouracil

 c) Both

 d) None



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Both
Both propylthiouracil and methimazole/carbimazole cross placenta.
But because of high protein binding capacity of propylthouracil is
transferred less across Placenta).
Therefore, it is preferred in pregnancy.
562. Which of the following oral antidiabetic
     drug is insulin secretagogues?
 a) Metformin

 b) Pioglitazone

 c) Nateglinide

 d) Acarbose



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Nateglinide
Nateglinide is an oral antidiabetic drug that causes the release of
insulin (insulin secretagogue).
It is a D-phenylalanine derivative which principally stimulates the 1st
phase insulin secretion.
It is used in type 2 diabetes mellitus along with other antidiabetics, to
control the prandial rise in blood glucose
563. Which of the following antidiabetic drug
     is insulin secretogogue ?
 a) Pramlintide

 b) Glucomannan

 c) Exenatide

 d) None



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Exenatide
Among parentralantidiabetic(hypoglycemic) drugs - Enenatide is
insulin secretagogue, i.e. stimulate insuline release.
564. Oral sore due to inhaled steroids are
     treated by ?
 a) Griseofulfin

 b) Amphotericin-B

 c) Fusidic acid

 d) Muprocin ointment



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Amphotericin-B
One of the common side effect of inhaled corticosteroids is oro-
pharyngeal candidiasis, which can be treated by,
Topical antifungal (nystatin, clotrimazole, amphoterian B oral
suspension).
Systemic oral azoles (fluconazole, itraconazole, posaconazole).
565. PGE1 analogue is ?
 a) Carboprost

 b) Alprostadil

 c) Epoprostenol

 d) Dinoprostone



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Alprostadil
PGI2 analogue - Epoprostenol,treprostinil.
PGE1 analogue - Alprostadil, Misoprostol
PGE2 analogue - Dinoprostone.
PGF2(alpha) analogue - Carboprost, latanoprost, bimatoprost,
travoprost.
566. Long acting 13-2 agonist is ?
 a) Formoterol

 b) Isoprenaline

 c) Salbutamol

 d) Ephedrine



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Formoterol
Beta-2 agonists:
Used in asthma.
Long acting - Salmeterol, formoterol.
Short acting - Salbutamol, terbutaline.
  567. Triptan taken by nasal route is ?
    a) Sumatriptan

    b) Rizatriptan

    c) Naratriptan

    d) Frovatriptan



   Correct Answer - A
   Ans. A. Sumatriptan
   Sumatriptan can also be taken as:
1. Nasalspray
2. Suppository
3. Subcutaneous injection
   Besidesumatriptan,Zolmitriptan can also be used by nasal route.
568. Acetaminophen [Paracetamol] induced
     liver toxicity is due to ?
 a) N-acetyl cystine

 b) NAPQ

 c) Co-Q

 d) Cytochrome 'C'



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. NAPQ
Paracetamol is metabolized to N-acetyl-
paraaminobenzoquinoneimine (NAPQ) by microsomal enzymes.
This metabolite has high affinity for sulf-hydryl groups and can
combine with the enzymes andotherbiomolecules resulting in
hepatotoxicity.
N-acetyl Cystine is used as an antidote.
It replenishs the glutathione stores of liver and prevents binding of
the toxic metabolite to other cellular constituents.
569. Drugs which are used in acute asthma
     include?
 a) Budesonide

 b) Terbutaline

 c) Salbutamole

 d) Theophylline

 e) Sodium cromoglycate



Correct Answer - B:C:D
Ans. is'b'i.e., Terbutaline,'c'i.e. Salbutamole &'d'i.e.
Theophylline
[Ref: KDT Vh/e p. 223]
Treatment of acute asthma:
The only drugs effective for the treatment of acute attack of asthma
are bronchodilators (beta 2-receptor agonists, anticholinergics, and
methylxanthines).
Mild attacks:
For patients with mild attack inhalation of a short acting beta-2
receptor agonist, e.g. salbutamol (albuterol), terbutaline is used.
An inhaled anticholinergic, e.g. ipratropium may be added if there is
no satisfactory response to beta 2- agonists alone.
In patients who are refractory to inhaled therapies, i.v. aminophylline
(theophylline) may be effective.
Severe attacks:
Oxygen phts continuous administration of aerosolized salbutamol
(albuterol) plus systemic steroids, e.g. methylprednisolone,
hydrocortisone.
Recently, MgSO4 has been tried in acute severe asthma by IV or
inhalation route.
570. Maximum effect of bronchodilatation in
     asthma is caused by ?
 a) Corticosteroids

 b) Theophylline

 c) Anticholinergic

 d) β2-Agonist)



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., β2-Agonist
β-agonists in Asthma
Bronchi have , β-adrenergic receptors which cause
bronchodilatation → So, the adrenergic drugs used in asthma are
selective β2 agonists.
β-agonists are the most effective bronchodilators
β2-agonists have some other effects also on airways (other
than bonrchodilatation), that are responsible for beneficial effects in
asthma :
Inhibition of release of mast cells mediators → mast cells stabilizing
action.
Inhibition of exudation and airway edema.
Increased mucociliary clearance
Decreased cough
β2-agonists have no effect on inflammation→
no antiinflammatory action.
571. Atypical side effect montelukast ?
 a) Good pasture syndrome

 b) Churg - Strauss syndrome

 c) Membranous glomerulonephritis

 d) Bronchial asthma



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Churg - Strauss syndrome
Churg-Strauss syndrome can be ceused by leukotriene antagonists
(e.g, Monteleukast).
572. True about oral iron preparations ?
 a) Most commonly used preparation is ferrous gluconate

 b) Ferrous fumarate is most efficient

 c) Different preparations have different biovailability

 d) Ferric preparations are more effective



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Different preparations have different biovailability
Preferred route for iron supplementation is oral.
Ferrous salts are inexpensive, have good iron content and are better
absorbed than ferric salts.
Most commonly used preparation isferrous sulfute, which is the
cheapest and as effective a source of elemental iron as more
expensive preparations.
It contains 32% iron in dried salt and 20% iron in hydrated salt.
Other effective and inexpensive preparations are ferrous gluconate
(12% lron) and ferrousfumarate (33% iron), which are equivalent to
ferrous sulfate.
  573. True about heparin induced
       thrombocytopenia ?
    a) Low molecular weight heparin is better alternative

    b) Antibodies are formed against platelets

    c) Vitamin K is specific antidote

    d) Within 12 hours of starting heparin



   Correct Answer - B
   Ans. B. Antibodies are formed against platelets
   Heparin induced thrombocytopenia (HlT)
   HeParin induced thrombocytopenia is an important adverse effect
   ofheparin administration, usuallycausedbyunfractionated heparin,
   but may also be seen with the use of low molecular weight heparin
   (LMWH).
   HIT may be of two types :
1. Type I (Non-immune mediated) :- It is mild and heparin maybe
   continued.
2. Type 2 (Immune mediated) :- It is due to formation of antibodies
   against platelets. Paradorical thrombosis can occur.
   Heparin must be discontinued immediately.
   Warfarin and LMW are contraindicated.
   Lepirudin (a direct thrombin inhibitor) is anticoagulant ofchoice.
   Alternatives are danaparoid,hiruitin and Argaboban.
574. Mechanism of action of ticagrelor ?
 a) Cox inhibition

 b) GPIIB/IIIAinhibition

 c) Inhibition of thromboxane synthase

 d) P2Y12 receptor antagonist



Correct Answer - D
Ans, D. P2Y12 receptor antagonist
Ticlopidine, clopidogrel, Prasugrelàthey block ADP mediated platelet
activation by irreversible antagonism of P2 Y12 receptor on ADP.
575. Mechanism of action of ticgrelor ?
 a) Reversible inhibition of ADP action

 b) Irreversible inhibition of ADP action

 c) Reversible inhibition of GPIIb/IIIa

 d) Irreversible inhibition of GPIIb/IIIa



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Reversible inhibition of ADP action
Cangrelor andticagrelot are reversible antagonist ofADP (P2 Y12), in
contrast to ticlopidine, which is irreversible antagonist.
576. Which of the following is a PAR
     antagonist ?
 a) Prasugrel

 b) Ticlopidine

 c) Tirofiban

 d) Vorapaxar



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Vorapaxar
PARs are activated after thrombin-mediated proteolytic cleavage of
their N-terminal exodomain.
Platelet activation by thrombin is mediated via two PARs: PAR-I and
PAR-4. PAR-I is the major human platelet receptor, exhibiting 10-
100 times higher affinity for thrombin when compared with PAR-4.
Two selective PAR-I antagonists are under clinical evaluation:
Vorapaxar (SCH530348) and Atopaxar (E5555).
577. Rebound increase in gastric acid
     secretion after stopping proton pump
     inhibitor therapy is due to?
 a) Parietal cell hyperplasia

 b) Increased histamine release

 c) Hypergastrinemia

 d) Hypersensitivity of Ach receptors



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Hypergastrinemia
Rebound acid hyper secretion (RAH) results in gastric acid secretion
above pretreatment levels after acid suppression.
PPI therapy leads to diminished acid secretion and antral D-cell
releases of somatostatin, while increasing G-cell release of
circulating gastrin.
The increased gastrin concentration exerts a trophic effect on
oxyntic mucosa, causing hyperplasia and increased functional
capacity of the enterochromafin - like (ECL) cell and parietal cell.
Increased acid secretion due to sustained hypergastrinemia is not
apparent during PPI therapy but appears with drug cessation
theoretically, leading to acid- related heartburn, acid regurgitation or
dyspepsia,
578. Which of following is a stool softener ?
 a) Bran

 b) Senna

 c) Phenalphthalein

 d) Docusates



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Docusates
Stool softener (Docusates, liquid paraffin)
They soften the stools by net water accumulation in the lumen by an
action on the intestinal mucosa.
They emulsify the colonic contents and increase penetration of water
into feces.
579. Drug of choice for drug induced peptic
     ulcer ?
 a) Prostaglandin analogues

 b) H2-receptor antagonists


 c) Proton pump inhibitors

 d) Antacids



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C,. Proton pump inhibitors
Drug of choice for NSAIDs induced peptic ulcer > PPIs
Most specific drug for NSAIDs induced peptic ulcer > Prostaglandin
analogue.
580. Atropine plus diphenoxylate combination
     is used for?
 a) Glaucoma

 b) Iridocyclitis

 c) Diarrhea

 d) Motion sickness



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Diarrhea
Diphenoxylate (2.5 mg) plus atropin (0.025 mg) combination is used
as antimotility drug for treatment of diarrhea.
581. Latest oral direct thrombin inhibitor is?
 a) Ximelagatran

 b) Indraparinux

 c) Dabigatran

 d) Fondaparinux



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Dabigatran
Ximelagatran was the first oral direct thrombin inhibitor approved;
however, it was subsequently withdrawn from the market because of
reports of liver failure.
Recently a new oral direct inhibitor, dabigatran, was approved for
use in Europe for prevention of various thromboembolism in patients
who have undergone hip or knee replacement surgery.
582. Ximelagatran is used as ?
 a) Antiplatelet

 b) Anticoagulant

 c) Fibrinolytic

 d) Antifibrinolytic



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Anticoagulant
Direct Thrombin Inhibitors:
This group includes hirudin, lepirudin, bivalirudin, argatroban,
dabigatran, melagatran, and ximelagatran.
Dabigatran and Ximelagatran (a prodrug of melagatran) can be
given orally.
All other drugs are used parenterally.
These drugs directly inactivate factor IIa (thrombin).
These are the anticoagulant of choice for heparin-induced
thrombocytopenia
583. Specific feature of simvastatin ?
 a) Most potent statin

 b) Longest acting statin

 c) Lipophilic

 d) Not metabolized



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Lipophilic
Statins are the most powerful LDL lowering drugs.
Statins are the most effective and best tolerated hypolipidemic
drugs.
Simvastatin and lovastatin are lipophilic and hence, their CNS
penetration is more than hydrophilic agents like pravastatin and
fluvastatin.
584. Statin having longest half life:
     September 2012
 a) Rosuvastatin

 b) Pravastatin

 c) Simvastatin

 d) Lovastatin



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A i.e. Rosuvastatin
Rosuvastatin
It is a competitive inhibitor of the enzyme HMG-CoA reductase,
having a mechanism of action similar to that of other statins.
Its approximate elimination half life is 19 h and its time to peak
plasma concentration is reached in 3-5 h following oral
administration.
585. Antitubercular drug which makes the
     patient non-infective earliest ?
 a) INH

 b) Rifampin

 c) Ethambutol

 d) Pyrazinamide



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. INH
In those with open or infectious pulmonary TB, the great majority of
bacilli is freely replicating in the cavity walls and is rapidly killed by
INH, thereby speedily rendering the patient non-infections.
586. Thymidine is responsible for resistance
     to which antibiotic ?
 a) Erythromycin

 b) Sulfonamide

 c) Tetracycline

 d) Nitroforantoin



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Sulfonamide
The sulfonamides are antimetabolites that compete with PABA,
thereby preventing synthesis of folic acid.
This inhibition blocks the formation of thymidine, some purines,
methionine and glycine.
The enterococci are able to use exogenous thymidine and are
therefore intrinsically resistant to the sulfonamides.
587. Which of the following is not excreted in
     kidney ?
a) Ciprofloxacin

b) Ofloxacin

c) Levofloxacin

d) Moxifloxacin



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Moxifloxacin
Fluroquinolone that are primarily excreted by renal
mechanisms and for which dose adjustment is needed include:
Ciprofloxacin
Gatifloxacin
Cinafloxacin
Levofloxacilin
Lomefloxacilin
Norfloxacin
Ofloxacin
588. Levamisol is a/an ?
 a) Immunomodulator

 b) Immunostimulant

 c) Antiheliminthic

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. All of the above
Levamisol is an anti-helminthic drug with immune-modulatory action.
At low doses it has immune-stimulatory action.
589. Gametocidal antimalarial drug for all
     species of plasmodium ?
 a) Chloroquine

 b) Quinine

 c) Primaquine

 d) Mefloquine



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Primaquine
Gametocidal - Acts on gametocytes
For all species: Primaquine, artimisinins
For P. vivax: Chloroquine, quinine
590. Quinine acts on which stage of
     plasmodium life cycle?
 a) Exoerythrocytic

 b) Pre-erythrocytic

 c) Erythrocytic

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Erythrocytic
Anti-malarial drugs acting on Erythrocyticschizogony.
Fast acting ===Chloroquine, amadioquine, quininamefloquine,
halofantrine, lumefanterine, atovaquone, artimisinin.
Slow acting === Pyrimethamine, proguanil,
sulfonamides,tetracyclines.
591. Which among the following is present
     only in iv [intravenous] form -
 a) Vancomycin

 b) Meropenem

 c) Streptomycin

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Meropenem
Meropenem is given intravenously.
Vancornycin is used intravenously for all infections, except for
pseudomembranous colitis, where it is used by oral route.
Streptomycin is administered by intramuscular route.
592. Emtricitabine is classified as?
 a) Alkylating agent

 b) Antimetabolite anticancer

 c) NRTI

 d) None of the above



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. NRTI
Emtricitabine is an anti-retroviral drug.
It is a nucleoside-reverse transcriptase inhibitor (NRTI).
It is a synthetic cytidine analogue.
Major side effects are lactic acidosis and liver dysfunction.
593. Emtricitabine is a/an ?
 a) Alkylating agent

 b) Antimetabolite

 c) Mitotic inhibitor

 d) None of the above



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Antimetabolite
Emtricitabine is an antimetabolite, but it is not an anticancer drug (it
is an anti-retroviral drug).
AII NRTIs are antimetabolites:-
'Although all NRTIs have same basic mechanism of action, different
drugs in the class serve as antimetabolites of different purine and
pyrimidine bases of DNA.
594. Synergistic action is shown by all except
     ?
 a) Penicillin plus sulfonamide

 b) Streptomycin plus tetracycline

 c) Rifampicin plus dapsone

 d) Penicillin plus tetracycline



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Penicillin plus tetracycline
Combination of a bactericidal with a bacteriostatic drug may be
synergistic or antagonistic depending on the organism.
If the organism is highly sensitive to the cidal drug - response to the
combination is equal to the static drug given alone (apparent
antagonism), because cidal drugs act primarily on rapidly multiplying
bacteria, while the static drug retards multiPlication.
This has been seen with penicillin + tetracydine/chloramphenicol on
pneumococci which are highly sensitive to penicillin.
Pneumococcal meningitis treated with penicillin + tetracycline had
higher mortality than those treated with penicillin alone.
Penicillin + erythromycin for group A Streptococci and nalidixic acid
+ nitrofuration for E. coli have also shown antagonism.
595. Neuropathy with INH therapy is least in
     patients?
 a) Having malnutrition

 b) Alcoholics

 c) Fast acetylators

 d) Vitamin B complex deficiency



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Fast acetylators
Peripheral neuropathy is more likely to occur in slowacetylators and
patients with predisposing conditions such as malnutrition,
alcoholism, diabetes, AIDS, and uremia.
596. Drugs used for H. Pylori are all except?
 a) Bismuth

 b) Amoxicillin

 c) Domperidone

 d) Clarithromycin



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Domperidone
Drugs useful for H. Pylori infection
Amoxicillin
Tinidazole/metronidazole
Omeprazole
Ranitidine
Tetracycline
Bismuth
Clarithromycin.
597. Duration of erythromycin used in
     treatment of diphtheria is ?
 a) 3 days

 b) 7 days

 c) 14 days

 d) 30 days



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. 14 days
Drug of choice for diphtheria is erythromycin.
Total course of antibiotics is given for 14 days
Alternative antibiotics are penicillin G, clindamycin and rifampir.
598. Longest acting carbapenems ?
 a) Imipenem

 b) Meropenem

 c) Doripenem

 d) Ertapenem



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Ertapenem
Ertapenem is a long-acting carbepenem with a broad spectrum
antimicrobial activity similar to older carbapenems, imipenem and
meropenem.
However, unlike imipenem, it has Poor activity against
pseudomonas.
599. XDR TB is defined as ?
 a) MDR plus resistance to fluoroquinolone

 b) MDR plus resistance to fluoroquinolone and streptomycin

 c) MDR plus resistance to fluoroquinolone and Amikacin

 d) MDR plus resistance to Amikacin



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. MDR plus resistance to Amikacin
MDR is defined as resistance INH and rifampicin with or without
resistance to other drugs. XDR is defined as resistance to INH and
rifampicin as well as to all fluoroquinolones and one of njectable
drugs (capreomycin, kanamycin, amikacin).
600. Neuropathy caused by INH increases in
     all except?
 a) Uremia

 b) Hyperthyroidism

 c) Diabetes mellitus

 d) Poor nutrition



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is'b'i.e., Hyperthyroidism
[Ref Katzung 11'h/e p. 1069]
isoniazid induced peripheral neuropathy:
Peripheral neuropathy is observed in 10 to 20% of patients given
doses greater than 5 mg/kg/d, but it is infrequently seen with the
standard 300-mg adult dose.
Peripheral neuropathy is more likely to occur in slow acetylators and
patients with predisposing conditions such as malnutrition,
alcoholism, iliabetes, AIDS, and uremia.
601. Idoxuridine is used for treatment of ?
 a) Influenza

 b) RSV

 c) HSV

 d) HIV



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. HSV
Idoxuridine is used only topically forkeratoconjunctivitis by HSV'
602. Which antibiotic should not be given
     after drinking milk?
a) Chloramphenical

b) Tetracycline

c) Erythromycin

d) Sulfonamide



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Tetracycline
603. Post-transplantation hypertension can
     be caused by:I. Rejection.      II.
     Cyclosporine nephrotoxicity.III. Renal
     transplant artery stenosis (RTAS).IV.
     Recurrent disease in the allograft.
 a) I,II,III,IV are correct

 b) I,II,IV are correct.

 c) I & III are correct

 d) None of the above is correct.



Correct Answer - A
Both acute and chronic rejection may result in hypertension. The
former causes acute fluid retention and plugging of peritubular
capillaries with inflammatory cells. This may progress to intimal
swelling and medial necrosis and eventuate in ischemia secondary
to endothelial proliferation and obliteration of small vessels. Chronic
rejection, thought to be related to protracted humoral injury, results
in obliteration of capillaries via the development of intimal
hyperplasia. Cyclosporine has a vasoconstrictive effect which,
through activation of the renin-angiotensin system, may lead to
hypertension. RTAS is responsible for hypertension in 4% to 12% of
renal allograft recipients. It responds well to percutaneous
angioplasty. A careful trial of angiotensin-converting enzyme
inhibitors may be diagnostic of RTAS. Recurrent disease such as
membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis and focal glomerular
sclerosis may result in significant hypertension in renal allograft
recipients.
604. Capecitabine belongs to which class of
     anticancer drug?
 a) Antimetabolite

 b) Alkylating agent

 c) Nitrogen mustards

 d) Vinca alkaloids



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Nitrogen mustards
Antimetabolites
Purine antagonists -Mercaptopurine, Thioguanine, Azathioprine,
Fludarabine, Cladaribine
Pyrimidine antagonists - S-Fluorouracil, Cytosine arabinoside
(cytarabine), CaPecitabine, Gemcitabine.
Folate antagonist- Methotrexate, Pemetrexed.
605. Which of the following drugs is
     associated with untoward side effect of
     renal tubular damage-
 a) Cisplatin

 b) Steptozotocin

 c) Methysergide

 d) Cyclophosphamide



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e. Cisplatin
Some nephrotoxic agents which cause tubular necrosis.
o Aminoglycosides           o Colistin                     o
Methoxyfluranes              o Sulfonamides
o Amphotericin B            o Cyclosporine                 o
Polymyxin                   o Tetracyclines
o Cephaloridine            o Intravenous immune globulin   o
Radioiodinated contrast       o Acetaminophenmedium
o Cisplatin
606. Drug that can cause hypertrophic pyloric
     stenosis is?
 a) Tertacyclin

 b) Erythromycin

 c) Ampicillin

 d) Rifampicin



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Erythromycin
o Maternal and infant use of erythromycin and other macrolide
antibiotics have been reported as risk factors for infantile
hypertrophic pyloric stenosis (IHPS).
607. Best method for methanol poisoning
     treatment:
     March 2007
 a) Ethanol

 b) Calcium gluconate

 c) Desferroxamine

 d) BAL



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A: Ethanol
When metabolized by hepatic alcohol and aldehyde dehydrogenase,
methanol forms formaldehyde and formic acid, both of which are
toxic.
Formic acid is the primary toxin that accounts for the majority of the
anion gap, metabolic acidosis, and ocular toxicity. Formic acid
inhibits cytochrome oxidase in the fundus of the eye. Swelling of
axons in the optic disc and edema result in visual impairment.
Degradation of formic acid is folate dependent. Thus, if a folate-
deficient person ingests ethanol, toxicity may be more severe due to
the increased accumulation of formic acid.
Approximately 90-95% of methanol metabolism occurs in the liver,
while 5-10% is excreted unchanged through the lungs and kidneys.
Methanol is primarily metabolized by alcohol and aldehyde
dehydrogenase.
Formaldehyde has a short half-life, lasting only minutes.
Formic acid is metabolized much more slowly, and it bioaccumulates
with significant methanol ingestion. Physical Sign
Ocular physical findings include sluggishly reactive or fixed and
dilated pupils.
Retinal edema or hyperemia
Edema of the optic disc may be seen.
Optic atrophy may appear in late stages (permanent blindness).
CNS signs include lethargy and confusion.
Respiratory signs include dyspnea (rare cases) or even Kussmaul
respiration, despite acidosis.
Cardiac signs (e.g., hypotension, bradycardia) are late signs
associated with a poor prognosis.
Lab studies
Methanol concentration: This study confirms ingestion and helps
guide treatment. Remember that low serum concentration do not
rule out significant toxicity; late presenters may have low methanol
concentrations but elevated formic acid levels and severe clinical
toxicity (e.g., severe metabolic acidosis, blindness, coma).
Treatment
Supportive measures
Attempted correction of acidosis using sodium bicarbonate is
indicated if pH is less than 7.20. An alkalemic pH makes it more
likely that formic acid will exist as its anion (formate), which cannot
access the CNS and optic nerve as readily.
Administer folic acid for several days to potentiate the folate-
dependent metabolism of formic acid to carbon dioxide and water.
Ethanol infusion is recommended: Ethanol is a competitive inhibitor
of alcohol dehydrogenase and, thereby, impairs the metabolism of
methanol and ethylene glycol. Ethanol has 10-20 times greater
affinity for alcohol dehydrogenase than methanol does.
Plasma formate concentration is of prognostic value
608. Lower esophageal sphincter pressure is increased by all of the following
     substances, EXCEPT:

 a) Gastrin

 b) Vasopressin

 c) Glucagon

 d) Secretin



Correct Answer - D
The lower esophageal sphincter, a physiologic entity but not an anatomic structure, plays
an important part in preventing gastroesophageal reflux. Neural, hormonal, myogenic, and
mechanical factors influence the tone of the sphincter. Gastrin, vasopressin, glucagon,
adrenergic agonists, and cholinergic agents increase the pressure. Secretin has the
opposite effect.
609. Interstitial nephritis is seen with all
     except
 a) Beta lactam inhibitors

 b) INH

 c) Diuretics

 d) Allopurinol



Correct Answer - B
INH [Ref. Harrison 17th/e p 1806, 1807 & 16th/e p 1702, 1703]
DRUGS CAUSING INTERSTITIAL NEPHRITIS
Antibiotics         DiureticsAnticonvulsantsMiscellaneous
. filactamso    • ThiazideQ • Phenytoinu       . Captopril0
.               •            •                 • H2 receptor
SulfonamidesQ FurosemideQ PhenobarbitoneQ blockerse
                .            •
• QuinolonesQ                                  . Omeprazole
                Triamterene Carbamazepine
. Vancomycin . NSAIDS° • Valproic acid . Mesalazine
•
                . Indinavir
Erythromycin
. Minocycline . Allopurinol
. Rifampicin
• Ethambutol
. Acyclovir
610. Lorcaserin is used as ?
 a) Anti-anxiety

 b) Anti-smoking

 c) Anti-helminthic

 d) Anti-obesity



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Anti-obesity
Lorcaserine is selective 5-HT2c agonist which decreases appetite in
treatment of obesity.
611. Half life of Nicotine in blood ?
 a) 15 minutes

 b) 2 hours

 c) 5 hours

 d) 24 hours



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. 2 hours
'Nicotine has a half-Iife of approximately 2 hours (range 1-2 hours).
  612. IC content of Ringer's lactate [mmol/L] ?
    a) 130

    b) 109

    c) 4

    d) 50



   Correct Answer - C
   Ans. C. 4
   One liter of Ringer's lactate solution contains :-
1. 130 mEq of sodium ion = 130 mmoVl
2. 109 mEq of chloride ion = 109 mmol/L
3. 28 mEq of lactate = 28 mmol/L
4. 4mEq of potassium ion = 4 mmol/L
5. 3 mEq of calcium ion = 1.5 mmol/L
613. Flu like syptoms is side effect of which
     anti TB drug ?
 a) NH

 b) Rifampicin

 c) Pyrzinamide

 d) Streptomycin



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Rifampicin
614. All of the following are known adverse
     effects of thalidomide, except:
 a) Diarrhoea

 b) Teratogenicity

 c) DVT

 d) Neuropathy



Correct Answer - A
Ans is 'a' i.e. Diarrhoea
o Thalidomide causes constipation and not diarrhoea.
615. Oxidation of drugs is mainly takes place
     in?
 a) Nucleu

 b) Smooth ER

 c) Rough ER

 d) Cytoplasm



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Smooth ER
Most of the microsomal drug metabolizing enzymes (Cyt. P450) are
located on smooth endoplasmic reticulum.
616. IPC 304B is related to -
 a) Punishment for cruelty by husband or his relatives

 b) Dowry death

 c) Death caused by negligence

 d) Punishment of culpable homicide, not amounting to murder



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e. Dowry death
IPC 304 - Punishment of culpable homicide, not amounting to
murder
IPC 304 A - Death caused by negligence
IPC 304 B - Dowry death : 10 years of imprisonment which can
extend to life.
IPC 498 - Punishment for cruelty by husband or his relatives.
617. IPC 201 is for -
 a) Punishment for embalming before autopsy

 b) Perjury

 c) Voluntary causing grievous hurt

 d) Kidnapping



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e. Punishment for embalming before autopsy [Ref:
Reddy 30th/e p. 11]
IPC 201 is for punishment for embalming before autopsy (and also
for the disappearance of evidence).
618. Sec 191 IPC is for -
 a) Medical negligence

 b) Hostile witness

 c) Criminal negligence

 d) Assault punishment



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e. Hostile witness [Ref Reddy 30th /e p. 11]
Perjury, Hostile witness and false certificate
191 IPC : (i) Giving false evidence (perjury) under oath and (ii)
hostile witness.
192 IPC: Fabricating false evidence (perjury).
193 IPC : Punishment for false evidence (punishment for perjury) :
imprisonment upto 7 years + fine.
194 IPC : Giving or fabricating false evidence to procure conviction
of capital offence.
195 IPC : Giving or fabricating false evidence to procure conviction
of offence punishable with imprisonment for life.
197 IPC : Issuing or signing (attesting) false certificate by a doctor is
a criminal offence.
201 IPC : Causing disappearance of evidence.
619. Dying declaration is a:
     MAHE 10
a) Circumstantial evidence

b) Oral evidence

c) Documentary evidence

d) Hearsay evidence



Correct Answer - C
Ans. Documentary evidence
620. Novus actus interveniens is -
 a) Facts speaking for itself

 b) Breaking of chain

 c) Contributory negligence

 d) Therapeutic misadventure



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e. Breaking of chain
A person is responsible for his actions and their consequences. This
principle applies to cases of assault or accidental injuries. However,
sometimes such continuity of events is broken by an entirely new
and unexpected happening, due to negligence of some other
person, i.e. "Novus actus interveniens" (an unrelated action
intervening).
For example, If a person has been assaulted due to which he has
sustained a large liver laceration, for which he is operated by a
surgeon. If the patient dies intraoperatively or postoperatively due to
complications related to surgery or injury, the person who has
assaulted the patient will be held responsible.
But, if the doctor has done some negligent act during surgery, e.g.
left the swab or instrument in abdomen during surgery; and patient
dies because of that act (sepsis due to swab), then the responsibility
may pass from original incident to later negligent act of doctor by
principle of `Novus actus intervention' (an unrelated action
intervening). Thus the doctor is responsible for negligent acts, i.e.
criminal negligence, and the assailant will not be fully responsible for
the ultimate harm.
621. Inquest, not followed in India is -
 a) Police inquest

 b) Magistrate inquest

 c) Coroner's inquest

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e.,Coroner's inquest
Coroner's court used to be held in India in Bombay (Mumbai). Now,
it is held nowhere in the country. It was abolished even from Mumbai
in 1999.
622. Length of the fetus is 40cms. What would
     be the age of gestation ?
 a) 4 months

 b) 6 months

 c) 7 months

 d) 8 months



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e.,8 months [Ref Modi 23'die p. 1016, 1037; Dutta
Obstetrics 6th/e p. 41]
According to Rule of Hasse : Length = 5 x months of pregnancy.
Thus, 40 = 5 x months of pregnancy or months of pregnancy = 8
623. Extra permanent tooth to erupt is -
 a) Upper incisor

 b) Canine

 c) Molar

 d) Lower incisor



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Upper incisor [Ref Textbook of Pediatric
Decntistry p. 354]
Most common supernumerary teeth are permanent, anterior incisor
in the maxilla (maxillary incisors), called mesiodens.
After maxillary incisors, maxillary and mandibular fourth molars
called distodens or distomolars
624. True about finger printing is -
 a) Most common type is whorls

 b) Most specific method of identification

 c) Not present at birth

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e. Most specific method of identification [Ref Reddy
30thie p. 76]
Finger prints are present from birth both on epidermis and dermis,
remain constant throughout life and can't be altered without
destroying true skin. Fingers prints are due to papillary or epidermal
'ridges' on the tips of fingers and thumb.
Finger print pattern is absolutely individual i.e. no two hands are
entirely alike, not even identical twins. That's why, it is
best (most sensitive and most specific) and most reliable method of
identification (Quetelet's rule of biological variation).
Loops (67% most common) > Whorls (25%) > archer (7%) >
composite (2% least common) are four main types of pattern.
It is accepted that chances of 2 finger prints matching 16 ridge
characteristic are infinitely small (Parikh's). In practice 8-6 points of
fine comparision are accepted as proof of identity.
625. UV rays examination is done for -
 a) Faded tattoo

 b) Blood satins

 c) Hair examination

 d) None of the above



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e. Faded tattoo [Ref Principles of Forensic Medicine
and Toxicology by Rajesh Bardale]
Tattoo mark is permanent when dye penetrates the dermis.
Ultraviolet lamp makes old tattoos readily visible. A faded
tattoo mark becomes visible by use of Infrared photography or
rubbing the part and examining with magnifying lens.
  626. Just before the birth which epiphysis
       appears?
    a) Lower end of femur

    b) Upper end of humerus

    c) Lower end of fibula

    d) Upper end of tibia



   Correct Answer - A
   Ans. is 'a' i.e., Lower end of femur [Ref Reddy 30/e p. 64, 65]
1. At birth center appears upper end of tibia and head of humerus.
2. At 2 months intrauterine life (IUL) → Center appears for mandible,
   clavicle, ribs, vertebrae, frontal and parietal bones.
3. At 3 months IUL → Center appears for sacrum.
4. At 4 months IUL → Center appears for temporal and occipital
   bones.
5. At 5 months IUL → Center appears for calcaneum.
6. At 6 months IUL → Center appears for sternum.
7. At 7 months IUL → 4 Center appears for talus.
8. At 9 months IUL/birth → Center appears for lower end of femur.
9. At birth → Center appears upper end of tibia and head of humerus.
627. Base of sphenoid fuses with occipit at
     the age of -
 a) 20 years

 b) 30 years

 c) 40 years

 d) 50 years



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., 20 years [Ref Dr. Anil Aggrarwal p.68]
Spheno-occipit is the earliest to fuse (20 years).
Saggital suture obliterates at 30-35 years.
Coronoid (coronal suture) obliterates at 35-40 years.
Lambdoid suture obliterates at 45-50 years.
Squamous suture obliterates at 60 years.
Spheno-parietal suture obliterates at 70 years.
628. False about declaration of brain stem
     death in hospital -
 a) Presence of neurologist is not required

 b) Drug overdose should be ruled out

 c) Patient must be in coma

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e. Presence of neurologist is not required [Ref
Principles of Forensic Medicine & Toxicology By Rajesh
Bardale p. 134]
Guidelines for declaration of brain stem death
Brain death needs to be certified by a board of doctor's consisting of:
Registered Medical Practioner (RMP) in charge of hospital where
brain death has occurred.
An independent RMP -a specialist.
A Neurologist / Neurosurgeon nominated by panel.
RMP treating the patient.
The patient must be examined by team of doctors at least trice with
a reasonable gap of time in between (at least 6 hours).
None of the doctor's who participate in diagnosis of brain death
should have any interest in transplantation or organ removal from
cadaver.
Brain death certificate has to be signed by all the members of board.
Diagnosis of brain stem death depends upon following findings
The patient must be in deep coma and cause of the coma must be
irreversible structural brain stem damage (i.e. prolonged hypoxia,
trauma, illness or toxic insult) must be established.
Exclusion of other causes of coma :
Hypothermia,
Drug overdose eg: CNS depressants (benzodiazepines, barbiturates
etc)
Metabolic or endocrine disturbances
Intoxication (alcohol)
Demonstrating of absence of brain stem reflexes (Pupillary reflex,
oculovestibular reflex(, corneal reflex, pharyngeal and tracheal
reflexes.)
No spontaneous respiration.
   629. Time interval between somatic and
        molecular death is -
    a) 5-10 min

    b) 10-30 min

    c) 30 -1hr

    d) 1 - 2 hrs



   Correct Answer - D
   Ans. is 'd' i.e. 1-2 hrs [Ref e-book of Postmortem changes by
   DR D Rao]
   Death of the tissues and cells individually (molecular death) takes
   place usually 1-2 hours after stoppage of vital functions (somatic
   death).
   Molecular death of various organs occur at different intervals after
   somatic death :
1. Nervous tissue       After 5 minutes.
2. Liver - After 15 minutes.
3. Heart - After 45 minutes.
4. Kidney 4 After 1 hours.
5. Muscles After 3 hours
   630. Bishop's tripod of life includes all except
        -
    a) Respiration

    b) Circulation

    c) Spinal cord reflexes

    d) Brain functions



   Correct Answer - C
   Ans. is 'c' i.e., Spinal cord reflexes
   Somatic death
   It is the complete and irreversible stoppage of the circulation,
   respiration and brain functions (bishop's tripod of life).
   Somatic death is associated with immediate signs of death :?
1. Permanent and complete cessation of function of brain and flat
   electric EEG with no response to external stimuli; i.e. brain death.
2. Permanent and complete cessation of function of heart and flat
   ECG.
3. Permanent and complete cessation of function of lungs
631. For autopsy, stomach is open through -
 a) Lesser sac

 b) Greater sac

 c) Greater curvature

 d) Lesser curvature



Correct Answer - C
Ans is 'c' i.e. Greater curvature [Ref Atlas of Adult Autopsy p.66]
Stomach is opened through greater curvature which allows to see
lesser sac.
Depending on type of case, any of the body cavity can be opened
first. Spinal cord is routinely not opened.
It is convenient to start the examination with the cavity chiefly
affected.
In cases of death due to asphyxia (especially hanging and
strangulation), neck should be opened last.
Spinal cord can be approached either from posterior (most
preferred) or anterior approach. High cervical spine injuries are best
seen by posterior and thoracic spine by anterior approach.
Blood for the sample is taken from femoral vein. The jugular or
subclavian veins can also be used. 10-20 ml of blood is taken and it
is taken before autopsy. 30 ml of blood should be preserved
(minimum is 10 ml).
632. Tache noire de salenortica is a
     postmortem finding is related to
 a) Eye

 b) Muscle

 c) Hair

 d) Semen



Correct Answer - A
Brownish discolouration of the sclera due to cellular debris and dust-
Tache noire
633. Bacteria most commonly involved in
     bowel decomposition after death is -
 a) Streptococcus pyogenes

 b) Clostridium welchii

 c) Pseudomonas aeruginosa

 d) None



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Clostridium welchii [Ref Reddy 30th/e p. 149-152]
Bowel decomposition is brought about by aerobic and anaerobic
bacteria present in small intestine (e.g. C. welchii, staphylococcus,
E.coli etc.) which release enzymes (especially lipase and
lecithinase) which act on body to cause breakdown.
634. Negative autopsy is defined as -
 a) No cause of death is found on gross as well as
    histopathological examination

 b) Cause is apparent on gross examination but not on
    histopathological examination

 c) Gross findings are minimal

 d) Cause is apparent on gross examination but not found because
    of constraints on the part of doctor



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., No cause of death is found on gross as well as
histopathological examination [Ref Dr. Anil Aggrawal p.124]
Types of autopsy
Normal autopsy - cause is apparent from gross examination
Defective autopsy - cause was ascertainable, but was not
ascertained due to constrains on the part of doctor, hospital, facilities
etc
Obscure autopsy - gross findings are minimal, indecisive or obscure,
as in adrenal insufficiency, anesthetic overdose, myxedema, rare
plant poisons, thyrotoxicosis etc. subsequent examination like
histology, microbiology, toxicology or serology reveal the cause.
Negative autopsy / inconclusive autopsy - Cause is not clear from
gross as well as subsequent examinations.
635. Last organ to putrefy in females is:
     BHU 12
 a) Kidney

 b) Uterus

 c) Brain

 d) Spleen



Correct Answer - B
Ans. Uterus
636. Adipocere formation is seen in:
 a) Dead body exposed to air

 b) Dead body buried in damp, clay soil

 c) Burial in dry hot air

 d) All



Correct Answer - B
B i.e. Dead body buried in damp, clay soil
Ideal condition for adipocere formation are warm (hot) temperature,
moisture (humid) & diminution of airQ e.g. dead body immersed in
water or damp soilQ
637. In Adipocere, color change seen is -
 a) Grayish white

 b) Black

 c) Brown

 d) Red



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e. Grayish white [Ref Reddy 30th/e p. 155-156]
Adipocere is a crumbly, waxy, water-insoluble material consisting
mostly of saturated fatty acids. Depending on whether it was formed
from white or brown body fat, adipocere is either grayish white or tan
in color.
638. Not a feature of postmortem staining -
 a) Occur immediate after death

 b) Common in dependent part

 c) Disappear with putrefaction

 d) Margins are sharp



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Occur immediate after death [Ref Reddy 30th/e
p.141,142]
Postmortem staining is an early sign (not immediate sign) of death.
It refers to discoloration of skin and internal organs after death due
to accumulation of fluid blood in toneless capillaries and small veins
of dependent part of the body.
It does not appear elevated above the surface but has sharply
defined (usually horizontal) margins.
It is an early sign of death. It starts at about 1 hour, becomes a
series of mottled patches within 1-3 hours and these pathces
increase in size to coalesce in about 3-6 hours. After 6-12 hours,
lividity is fully developed and fixed (unchangeable), i.e. primary
lividity. It ends when putrification sets in. Fixation of lividity is due to
stagnation of blood in distended capillaries and venules (not due to
coagulation of blood).
639. True about cadaveric spasm :
 a) Develops immediately after death

 b) May develop hours after death

 c) Develops only in facial muscles

 d) All



Correct Answer - A
A i.e. Develops immediately after death
640. Best temperature for putrefaction is -
 a) 0-10 C

 b) 10-45 C

 c) 45-100 C

 d) 100-150 C



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., 10-45 C [Ref Reddy 30th/e p. 149-152]
Optimum temperature for putrefaction 10°C - 45°C.
Putrefaction is the last stage in resolution of body from the inorganic
to organic state and is certain sign of death.
Putrefaction rate in air is twice as compared to in water, and eight
time as compared to in earth (Casper dictum).
Putrefaction is delayed in death due to wasting disease anemia,
debility, poisoning by carbolic acid, zinc chloride, strychine and
chronic heavy metal poisoning.
641. In India exhumation is ordered by ?
 a) Magistrate

 b) Health Secretory

 c) Health Minister

 d) Any local MLA



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Magistrate
Exhumation
Exhumation is lawful digging out of a burried body from the grave for
the purpose of identification or determination of cause of death.
Only a magistrate (executive magistrate) can order for exhumation.
In india, there is no time limit for exhumation, i.e. can be done at any
time after death.
It is done under supervision of medical officer and Magistrate in
presence of a police officer who provides witnesses to identify grave,
coffin and dead body, whenever possible, Magistrate should inform
the relatives and allow them not to remain present at the time of
enquiry.
The whole procedure should be conducted and completed in natural
day light.
Therefore, it is usually started early in morning.
   642. In a patient of unilateral loss of vision,
        the patient had injury to opposite eye
        leading to corneal opacification. The
        patient was operated by corneal grafting,
        he could see clearly again with one eye.
        The injury is said to be
    a) Simple

    b) Grievous

    c) Dangerous

    d) Hazardous



   Correct Answer - A
   Ans. is 'b' i.e., Grievous
   This patient had permanent vision loss as it was corrected by
   surgery (corneal transplant).
   Permanent loss of sight of either eye is grievous hurt.
   Injuries can be classified as
   1. A simple injury is one which is neither extensive nor serious, and
   which would heal rapidly without leaving any permanent deformity or
   disfiguration.
   2. A grievous injury is one (i) Which is extensive or serious (ii) Which
   does not heal rapidly, and (iii) Which leaves a permanent deformity
   or disfiguration. Section 320 IPC defines following injuries as
   grievous.
1. Emasculation (cutting of the penis, castration; or causing loss of
   power of erection due to spinal injury).
2. Permanent privation of the sight of either eye.
3. Permanent privation of the hearing of either ear.
4. Privation of any member (part, organ, limb) or joint.
5. Destruction or permanent impairing of powers of any member or
   joint.
6. Permanent disfiguration of head or face.
7. Fracture or dislocation of a bone or a tooth.
8. Any hurt which endangerous life or which causes the sufferer to be,
   during the space of twenty days in severe bodily pain, or unable to
   follow his daily routine. Section 319 IPC defines hurt as bodily pain,
   disease, or infirmity, caused to any person.
   Grievous hurt is a cognisable offence for which a police officer can
   arrest a person without a warrant from magistrate.
   3. Dangerous injury is a variety of grievous injury. It is an injury
   whichposes an immediate danger to life and is fatal in absence of
   surgical aid, e.g. gun shot wounds, compound skull fracture, trauma
   to large blood vessel or rupture of internal organ like spleen.
643. Chicken fat appearance is seen in -
 a) Antemortem wound

 b) Postmortem wound

 c) Gunshot injury

 d) None



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e. Postmortem wound [Ref Reddy 29th/e p. 164, 168;
Parikh 6th/e p. 4.76]
Chicken fat clot is seen in postmortem wound.
Gaping of the wound, presence of vital reaction and increased
serotonin are features of antemortem wound.
644. True about heat hematoma:
     PGI 12
 a) Inside the brain

 b) Between skull and dura mater

 c) Between skull and pericranium

 d) Between scalp and pericranium



Correct Answer - B
Ans. Between skull and dura mater
   645. Homicidal gunshot wound can be
        differentiated from suicidal gunshot
        wound by-
    a) Multiple gunshot wounds

    b) Presence of gunpowder on hand

    c) No sign of struggle

    d) None



   Correct Answer - A
   Ans is'a' i.e. Multiple gunshot wounds
   Following are a few ways to Differentiate murder from suicide
1. Where on the body the injury occurred: A shot to the side of the
   head, in the mouth, or to the front of the chest is usually suicide.
   Wounds located anywhere else are most likely homicide.
2. Distance of gun from the body: Most suicide shots are at contact or
   near contact range, causing a burn mark around the wound and
   leaving gunpowder residue (which can be wiped off). At contact
   range, and if the gun is fired just above a bone, such as the skull or
   the sternum, a star-like wound is produced. Anything further away is
   likely homicide.
3. Angle of the shot: Most suicide shots are angled slightly upward.
4. Number of shots fired: After one shot, even if a suicide victim isn't
   dead, he would likely be unconscious or physically unable to fire a
   second time. Multiple shots usually indicate homicide.
5. Presence of gunpowder residue on victims hand: If a man shot
   himself, there would be powder residue from unburned carbon on
   the hand that fired the gun.
6. Shots through clothing: A suicide victim will rarely shoot through
   clothing. If he shoots himself in the chest, which is unusual, he will
   open his shirt to expose the skin. Shots through clothing suggest
   homicide.
7. History, a note, other factors: If the victim left a suicide note, or was
   known to have personal problems, or if there was evidence of drug
   use or drinking, suicide is likely.
8. Evidence of a struggle: If there are scratches, cuts, bruises,
   homicide is likely.
646. Choking is characteristic of the following
     weapon:
 a) Revolver

 b) Pistol

 c) Shotgun

 d) Rifle



Correct Answer - C
The choking lessens the rate of spread of shot after it leaves the
muzzle, increases the explosive force and increases the velocity.
Shotguns have variable choke adapters.
Different degrees are known as full-choke, half-choke and
quarter-choke or improved cylinder.
Ref: The Essentials of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology by K S
Reddy, 27th edition, Page 184.
647. Beveling of skull is seen in -
 a) Broad end of the entry point in bullet injury

 b) Narrow end of the entry point in bullet injury

 c) Exit point of bullet

 d) Depressed fracture of the skull



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e.,Exit point of bullet [Ref Parikh 6th/e p. 4.43]
Wound of entrance shows a punched in (clean) hole in the outer
table. Cone shaped bone is detached from the inner table forming a
crater that is larger than the hole of the outer table and shows
beveling (sloping surface).
Thus, from looking outside, entrance wound is clean cut hole and
exit wound is bevelled opening.
648. Emphysema aquosum is seen in:
 a) Wet drowning

 b) Dry drowning

 c) Immersion syndrome

 d) Secondary drowning



Correct Answer - A
A i.e. Wet drowning
- Emphysema aquosum is seen in wet (typical) drowningQ where
drowning fluid causes alveolar wall disruption & enters tissue &
blood vessels. If dead body is thrown into water, due to hydrostatic
pressure water passes into lungs known as hydrostatic lung.
Oedema aquosum (no columns of froth) is seen in drowning of
unconscious.
- ARDS & Fibrosing alveolitis is seen in near drowning or secondary
drowning syndrome.
- Dry Lung is seen in dry drowning in which death occurs due to
laryngeal spasm.
- If drowning is survived, the event is referred to as near drowning &
complications as near (secondary) drowning syndrome..
- In Immersion syndrome death results from cardiac arrest due to
vagal inhibition.Q
649. Best indicator of antemortem drowning
     is:
     Delhi 07; TN 11
 a) Froth in nostrils

 b) Cutis anserina

 c) Washerwoman's hand

 d) Water in stomach



Correct Answer - A
Ans. Froth in nostrils
  650. Most specific sign of Antemortem burns
       is -
    a) Soot in respiratory passage

    b) Cyanosis of fingernails

    c) Pugilistic attitude

    d) Heat ruptures



   Correct Answer - A
   Ans. is 'a' i.e., Soot in respiratory passage [Ref: Parikh 6th le p.
   4.152-4.156]
   One of the most important characteristic of antemortem burns is the
   finding of 'Soot and carbon particles' in larynx, trachea and may be
   in lungs.
   A. Specific signs (which indicate antemortem burning) :
1. Soot and Carbon particles in respiratory passages
2. Increased carboxy hemoglobin (>5%) in blood
3. Signs of vital reaction
4. Signs of inflammation
5. Red line of demarcation
6. True blister (vesicle) containing protein (albumin) and chloride
7. Increased enzyme and sulfhydryl (-SH) group
8. Increased serotorine and histamine
9. Signs of healing and repair.
   B. Non-specific signs (may also occur in postmortem burning) :
1. Pugilistic attitude
2. Heat hematoma
3. Heat fracture
4. Heat ruptures.
651. Sexual gratification of a women is
     obtained by another woman is called ?
 a) Tribadism

 b) Bestiality

 c) Fellatio

 d) Cunnilingus



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e.,Tribadism [Ref Parikh 6th/e p. 5.50, 5.52; Reddy
31"/e p. 401; Rao 2"'Ile p. 373-74; Rajes Bardale 1"/e p. 325-26]
Tribadism (Lesbianism or female homosexuality) :
Sexual gratification of a women is obtained by another woman by
kissing, body contact, manipulation of breast and genitalia.
Active partner is called dyke or butch and the passive agent is
called femme. This is not an offence in India.
652. Sex with cadaver is called -
 a) Necrophilia

 b) Exhibitionism

 c) Voveyrism

 d) Undinism



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Necrophilia [Ref Narayan Reddy 30thie p. 394]
Necrophilia : In this condition, there is a desire for sexual intercourse
with dead bodies. It is said to have sadomasochistic foundation and
that decomposition, foul smell and coldness act as stimulants.
653. Sexual gratification by inflicting pain on
     partner -
 a) Sodomy

 b) Sadism

 c) Necrophilia

 d) Bestiality



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Sadism [Ref Reddy 30th/e p. 394]
Sexual gratification is obtained or increased from acts of physical
cruelty or infliction of pain on one's partner.
It is seen more commonly in men. To obtain sexual gratification, the
sadist may bite, beat, whip, produce cuts on the victim, etc
654. Masochism means:
     TN 09
 a) Sexual intercourse with dead body

 b) Sexual pleasure by contact with articles of opposite sex

 c) Sexual pleasure by suffering of pain

 d) Sexual pleasure by self-stimulation



Correct Answer - C
Ans. Sexual pleasure by suffering of pain
655. Irresistible sexual desire in a male is
     known as:
     AIIMS 08
 a) Nymphomania

 b) Tribadism

 c) Satyriasis

 d) Sadism



Correct Answer - C
Ans. Satyriasis
Satyriasis is excessive sexual desire in male where he enjoys
having multiple sexual partners or desires excessive sexual activity.
The female-specific term for the same condition is Nymphomania.
A fetish is an abnormal stimulus or object of sexual desire.
Fetishism means the use of such objects of sexual gratification
leading to orgasm. For exmaple underclothing, brassiere, petticoat,
stocking, shoes, etc.
Frotteurism :
Sexual satisfaction is obtained by rubbing against persons in crowd.
If they attempt intercourse, they have a premature ejaculation or
they are impotent.
It is an uncommon perversion and rarely occurs alone
656. Sexual gratification obtained by enema is
     called -
 a) Exhibitionism

 b) Fetichism

 c) Klismaphillia

 d) Frotteurism



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e. Klismaphillia [Ref Internet]
Klismaphilia (or klysmaphilia), is a paraphilia involving enjoyment of,
and sexual arousal from, enemas.
657. To examine the vaginal cells in of the
     rape victim test used is -
 a) Lugol's iodine test

 b) Takayama test

 c) Florence test

 d) Precipitin test



Correct Answer - A
Ans is 'a' i.e. Lugol's iodine test [Ref G Rao p. 301]
Lugol's iodine test
It is done on the washing of glans penis (or from a moist blotting
paper)of accused, which then exposed to iodine vapors or lugol's
iodine solution. Brown color means the test is positive (on 4th day).
Brown color is due to glycogen present in vaginal epithelial cells of
the victim.
  658. Absorption elution technique is used for
       -
    a) Blood group detection

    b) Species detection

    c) Seminal stain examination

    d) None of the above



   Correct Answer - A
   Ans. is 'a' i.e., Blood group detection [Ref Parikh 6th/e p. 7.15-
   7.18; SK Singhal 4'1'1e p. 158-162]
   For blood grouping, following tests are used :
   1) Immunological (serological) :
1. absorption-elution test,
2. absorption-inhibition test,
3. mixed agglutination test,
4. latex test.
   2) Enzymological methods.
   3) Latte's crust method.
659. Test to know the species from blood
     stain is -
 a) Takayama test

 b) Benzidine test

 c) Precipitin test

 d) Teichmann's test



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Preciptin-test [Ref Parikh 6m/e p. 7.15-7.18; S.K.
Singhal 4'/e p. 158-162]
For detection of species, serological (immunological) tests are
used. These tests are :
Precipitin test             Haemagglutination
                            inhibition test
Gel diffusion test.         Double diffusion test.
Precipitation               Latex agglutination test.
electrophoresis.
Isoenzyme method
(enzymological test)
   660. All of the following are true for ingestion
        of acid except -
    a) They are hygroscopic

    b) Coagulate proteins

    c) Hemoglobin to hematin

    d) Systemic symptoms are severe



   Correct Answer - D
   Ans. is 'd' i.e. Systemic symptoms are severe
   Acids fix, destroy and erode the surface with which they come in
   contact. They mainly act locally by
1. Hygroscopic extraction of water from tissues
2. Coagulation of proteins
3. Conversion of hemoglobin into hematin.
   As a rule there is no remote systemic action with exception to shock.
661. Max damage is done by which poison -
 a) Irritant poison

 b) Corrosive poison

 c) Alcohol

 d) Opioid



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Corrosive poison [Ref Rajesh Bardale p. 437]
Corrosives fix, destroy and erode the surface with which they come
in contact. Thus, they cause extensive tissue damage.
Irritants produce less sever damage than corrosives and produce
symptoms simulating gastroenteritis.
662. Least toxic form of lead is -
 a) Lead acetate

 b) Lead oxide

 c) Lead carbonate

 d) Lead sulphide



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Lead sulphide [Ref Parikh 6th le p. 9.17-9.20;
Reddy 30thle p. 497-498]
No heavy metal is poisonous in native form, except lead. Metallic
lead and all its salts are poisonous. The principal salts which
produce toxic effects are : (1) Lead acetate (sugar of lead), (2) lead
carbonate (safeda or white lead), (3) lead chromate, (4) lead
monoxide (lethrage), (5) lead tetraoxide (red lead, vermilion, sindur)
and (6) lead sulphide (least toxic).
663. Charas is :
 a) Leaves of Cannabis Indica

 b) Flowers of Cannabis Indica

 c) Stem of Cannabis Indica

 d) Resin exudate of Cannabis Indica



Correct Answer - D
D i.e. Resin exudates of cannabis Indica
664. Methanol attacks ?
 a) Cones

 b) Rods

 c) Ganglion cells of retina

 d) Germinal cell layer



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Ganglion cells of retina
Methyl alcohol is metabolised very slowly and thus stays for a longer
period in the body.
It is oxidised into formic acid and formaldehyde in the tissues. These
toxic agents cause oedema followed by degeneration of the ganglion
cells of the retina, resulting in complete blindness due to optic
atrophy.
665. Arsenic poisoning presents with
     symptoms mimicking
 a) Cholera

 b) Dhatura poisoning

 c) Barbiturates poisoniong

 d) Morphine poisoning



Correct Answer - A
Ans:A.)Cholera.
ARSENIC
• Copper arsenite - sheele's green
• Copper acetoarsenite - paris green
• Permissible limits of arsenic in ground water - 0.05mg/L
• The gastroenteric type of poisoning resembles cholera
• Greatest quantity is seen in - liver
• Red velvety appearance of mucosa of stomach
• Most affected part of the stomach – pylorus
• Subendocardial petechial hemorrhages of the ventricle is typical of
arsenic poisoning (also found in phosphorus, barium, mercury and in
cases of heat stroke and acute infectious disease e.g. influenza)
• Rigor mortis lasts longer than usual, Delays putrefaction
Acute poisoning
• Necrosis of intestinal mucosa with hemorrhagic gastroenteritis
• Hypotension, delayed cardiomyopathy
Chronic poisoning
• Aldrich Mee's line on finger nails
• Rain drop pigmentation on skin(meastes like rash)
• Chronic consumption of water containing high arsenic
concentrations lead to vasospasm and peripheral vascular
insufficiency - black foot disease
• Diabetes, peripheral neuropathy, gangrene
• Cancer of skin, lung, liver (angiosarcoma), bladder, kidney.
• Arsenophagists - some people take arsenic daily as tonic or
aphrodisiac and acquire tolerance
• Chelating agent - Dimercaprol




Arsenic was used as murder weapons in royal families, and called
as "the poison of kings and king of poisons"
666. Which of the following is most specific
     for arsenic poisoning ?
 a) Red velvety stomach mucosa

 b) Blue lining on gums

 c) Tremors

 d) Anemia



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e. Red velvety stomach mucosa [Ref Parikh 6th/e p.
9.9-9.11; Reddy 30" `/e p. 493-494; Essentials of forensic
medicine-812]
Red velvety mucosa is a typical postmortem finding in acute arsenic
poisoning.
  667. Black foot disease is caused by
    a) Arsenic

    b) Cadmium

    c) Lead

    d) Mercury



   Correct Answer - A
   Ans. is 'a' i.e., Arsenic
   Chronic arsenic exposure can cause 'black foot disease' a severe
   form of peripheral vascular disease, causing gangrene of lower
   limbs.
   Arsenic poisoning may be acute or chronic.
   Acute arsenic poisoning
   It can present in any of the two ways :
1. Gastrointestinal type : It is the common form and resembles
   bacterial gastroenteritis (e.g. cholera). There is garlic adour with
   hemorrhagic gastroenteritis and necrosis of intestinal mucosa. There
   is tenesmus and anal irritation. Dehydration may cause acute
   circulatory collapse, with hypotension, oliguria and acute tubular
   necrosis (ATN).
2. Fulminant narcotic form : Large dose of arsenic is rapidly absorbed
   without producing GI symptoms. These are giddiness, headache,
   myalgia, formication, vertigo and death in 2-3 hours.
   Postmortem appearance include :
1. Red velvety mucosa of stomach and submucous petechial
   haemorrhage.
2. Subendocardial petechial haemorrhage.
3. Fatty degeneration of liver, kidney and heart.
   Chronic arsenic poisoning
   Chronic arsenic poisoning has four stages :
1. First stage (nutritional and gastrointestinal disturbances) : The
   earliest sign is gradual emaciation. There is loss of appetite, nausea
   and intermittent vomiting and diarrhea.
2. Second stage (catarrhal changes) : It resembles common cold, i.e.
   conjunctivitis, running nose and eyes, coughing etc.
3. Third stage (skin rash) : There is classical 'rain drop pigmentation',
   i.e. patchy brown pigmentation of skin. At initial stages, there is a
   vesicular eruption which may resemble nettle rash. Hyperkeratosis
   of palms and soles occur. There are white transverse bands
   crossing the nails, known as Mee's line, and indicate periods of
   arrested growth due to interference with normal metabolism. There
   is alopecia and exfoliative dermatitis.
4. Fourth stage (nervous disturbances) : There is sensory and motor
   (i.e. mixed) polyneuropathy, with painful paresthesia of hands and
   feet and muscle tenderness.
   There may be evidence of liver (fatty liver) and kidney damage and
   bone marrow suppression (causing anemia and other cytopenias).
   Heart may also be involved.
   Chronic arsenic exposure can also cause 'black foot disease' a
   severe form of peripheral vascular disease, causing gangrene of
   lower limbs.
   Arsenic is carcinogenic, can cause cancers of skin (squamous cell
   carcinoma and basal cell carcinoma), lung, liver, bladder, kidney,
   larynx and lymphoid system (leukemia).
668. Marsch test is done for poisoning with ?
 a) Lead

 b) Mercury

 c) Arsenic

 d) Nickel



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e. Arsenic [Ref Parikh 6thle p. 9.9-9.11; Reddy 30th/e
p. 493-494; Essentials offorensic medicine-812]
Marsh's test and Reinsh's test were used arsenic poisoning, but are
obsolete now.
669. Papaver semniferum milk exudes from ?
 a) Leaf

 b) Root

 c) Poppy seed

 d) Unripe capsule



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Unripe capsule [Ref Reddy 30th/e p. 533-534]
Opioids (opiates) are derived from the poppy plant. Opium is the
dried juice obtained by incision of the unripe capsule of the white
poppy, papaver somniferum. Natural derivatives of opium are
morphine, heroin and codeine.
   670. Arrow poison is ?
    a) Opium

    b) Curare

    c) Cannabis

    d) Cyanide



   Correct Answer - B
   Ans. is 'b' i.e. curare [Ref Dr. Anil Aggrawal p. 447]
   Arrow poisons ?
1. Plant based -Abrus precatorius, aconite, calotropis, croton oil,
   curare, strychnine, stropanthus.
2. Animal based -Batracotoxin (BTX).
671. Acid used for forging signature is ?
 a) Sulphuric acid

 b) Nitric acid

 c) Carbolic acid

 d) Oxalic acid



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Oxalic acid [Ref Parikh 6th /e p. 8.32-8.34; Reddy's
Essentials of forensic medicine and toxicology 27th/e p. 468-
469]
Oxalic acid is used to erase writing, as a bleaching agent and in
calico printing
672. Smack is -
 a) Cocaine

 b) Heroine

 c) Dhatura

 d) Cannabis



Correct Answer - B
Ans is 'b' i.e., Heroin
Heroin (smack or brown sugar) is the most commonly abused opioid
and 2" most commonly abused substance, after alcohol.
673. Mickey Finn is ?
 a) Chloroform

 b) Methyl alcohol

 c) Chloral hydrate

 d) Ethylene glycol



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Chloral hydrate [Ref Reddy 30th/e p. 540]
Mickey finn is a combination of alcohol and chloral hydrate.
674. Thorn apple is ?
 a) Dhatura

 b) Nax vomika

 c) Opioid

 d) Cannabis



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e. Dhatura [Ref Parikh &hie p. 10.50-10.51;
Essentials offorensic medicine-812]
Dhatura (thorn apple) grows on waste land all over india and is of
two types (i) Dhatura alba and (ii) dhatura niger. All parts of plant is
poisonous, especially seeds and fruits. Active principles of dhatura
are levohyoscyamine, hyoscine (scopolamine) and atropine.
675. Acid injury can be differentiated from
     alkali injury by ?
 a) Liquefactive necrosis

 b) Acid burns are more dangerous

 c) Perforation is more common

 d) Affects more commonly esophagus



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e. Perforation is more common
676. Best method of treatment of Methyl
     alcohol poisoning is :
 a) Calcium gluconate

 b) Ethyl alcohol

 c) Amphetamines

 d) 1 % Ammonia



Correct Answer - B
B i.e. Ethyl alcohol
677. How many days a person can live
     without food and water ?
 a) 1 to 2 days

 b) 2 to 4 days

 c) 5 to 7 days

 d) 10 to 12 days



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is. d, 10 to 12 days [Ref Parikh 6th/e p. 3.74; SK Singhal ele
p. 146]
Feeling of intense hunger lasts for→ 30-48 hours
Emaciation & absorption of subcutaneous fat begins to occur→ After
4-5 days
 Newborn may survive with out food & water→ For 7-10 days
Adult may survive without food & water → 10-12 days
If food alone is withdrawn death occurs in → 6-8 weeks (50-60 days)
678. MTP can be done by a single doctor till ?
 a) 8 weeks

 b) 12 weeks

 c) 20 weeks

 d) 24 weeks



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., 12 weeks [Ref Dutta 6th/e p. 174; Park 22"/e p.
467]
The Act provides safeguards to the mother by authorizing only a
Registered Medical Practitioner having experience in gynecology
and obstetrics to perform abortion where the length of pregnancy
does not exceed 12 weeks.
679. Alcohol is taken with aerated soft drinks
     because -
 a) Absorption is faster

 b) Effect is increased

 c) To avoid hangover

 d) None of the above



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Absorption is faster [Ref Handbook of Alcoholic
Beverages]
The rate of alcohol absorption is dependent on its concentration,
being the highest from beverages containing about 20% to 30%
alcohol, and on the speed of its consumption.
Alcohol consumed in acrated beveraes is more readily absorbed, as
is alcohol taken on an empty stomach.
680. Blisters are absent in ?
 a) Burns

 b) Putrefaction

 c) Arsenic Poisoning

 d) Postmortem caloricity



Correct Answer - D
Ans is 'd' i.e., Postmortem caloricity [Ref Reddy03 tive p.
139,140; S.K. Singhal p. 92]
There is no blistering in postmortem caloricity.
All other conditions are associated with blister formation
681. Miner's cramps are also called:
     NEET 13
 a) Heat collapse

 b) Heat cramps

 c) Sunstroke

 d) Heat exhaustion



Correct Answer - B
Ans. Heat cramps
682. Ophitoxemia is ?
a) Snake venom poisoning

b) Scorpion bite

c) Spider bite

d) Tick bite



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e.,Snake venom poisoning [Ref Ramesh Gupta
Zoology book]
Ophitoxemia is poisoning by snake venom.
683. After death, blood is taken from ?
 a) Femoral vein

 b) Antecubital vein

 c) Jugular vein

 d) Carotid artery



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e. Femoral vein [Ref Forensic Neuropathology p.174]
"Ideally, the blood should be collected from femoral vein distal to
clamp or ligature and without milking the calf or thigh" - Forensic
Neuropathology p.174
"Femoral vein blood sample is preferred over a heart blood sample"
- Water-Related Death Investigation p. 269
Blood for the sample is taken from femoral vein. The jugular or
subclavian veins can also be used. 10-20 ml of blood is taken and it
is taken before autopsy. 30 ml of blood should be preserved
(minimum is 10 ml).
684. Corona mortis is ?
 a) Is a vascular anastomosis

 b) Post mortem heart & coronary arteries examination

 c) Another term used for rigor mortis

 d) None of the above



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e. Is a vascular anastomosis [Ref BRS Gross
Anatomy p. 112]
Corona mortis:
This is also called as circle of death and refers to vascular ring form
by the anastomosis of an aberrant artery with the normal obturator
artery arising from a branch of the internal iliac artery. At the time of
laparoscopic hernia this vessel is torn both end of vessel can bleed
profusely, because both arise from a major artery.
The surgeon should remember these anatomic landmarks and the
point of mesh fixation should be selected superiorly, laterally and
medially.
685. Crystal violet blood agar is used for
     which bacteria?
 a) Corynebacterium diphtheriae

 b) Staph aureus

 c) β-hemolytic streptococcus

 d) Meningococcus



Correct Answer - C
β-hemolytic streptococcus
Crystal violet blood agar is a selective medium for isolation of p-
hemolytic group-A streptococcus.
o Crystal violet permits the growth of streptococcus but inhibits
growth of other gram positive bacteria (including
staphylococcus)
686. Example of transfer of drug resistance
     by conjugation -
 a) Staphylococci to rifampicin

 b) Pneumococcus to penicillin G

 c) M tuberculosis to antitubercular drugs

 d) E coli to streptomycin



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., E coli to streptomycin [Ref Basics in laboratory
microbiology p. 781]
Drug resistance
It refers to unresponsiveness of a microorganism to an antimicrobial.
Drug resistance may be acquired by :
1. Mutation
It may be single step (entercocci to streptomycine, staphlococci to
rifampicin) or multistep(erythromycin, tetracycline, chloramphenicol,
salmonella for ciproflaxacin).
Mutational drug resistance is also important in tuberculosis.
2. Genetic transfer
Drug resistance from one organism to other may be transferred by :
 Conjugation (most common): It is responsible for multidrug
resistance. It is important for resistance of S. typhi against
chloramphenicol and E.coli against streptomycin.
Transduction : Most important for transfer of resistance in
staphylococci by (3 – lactamase.
Transformation (less significant) : Important in pneumococci
resistance to penicillin G
687. Multiple drug resistance is transferred
     through -
 a) Transduction

 b) Transformation

 c) Conjugation

 d) Mutation



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Conjugation
Resistance to multiple drugs is transmitted by R factor (plasmid)
- R factor is transferred from one bacterium to other by conjugation.
- Transduction and mutation usually cause resistance to one drug.
- Transformation is not involved significantly in drug resistance.
688. Medium used for antibiotic sensitivity:
 a) CLED agar

 b) Hektoen agar

 c) Mueller-Hinton agar

 d) Salt milk agar



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is. 'c' i. e., Mueller-Hinton agar
Antibiotic sensitivity testing
Antibiotic sensitivity testing is carried out to determine appropriate
antibiotic to be used for a particular strain isolated from clinical
specimens.
Antibiotic testing can be carried out by two broad methods :
a) Disc diffusion tests
b) Dilution tests
A) Disc diffusion tests
There are most commonly used methods to determine antibiotic
susceptibility.
Discs impregnated with known concentration of antibiotics and are
placed on the culture medium that has been inoculated with a
culture of bacterium to be tested.
Antibiotic sensitivity is determined by zone of inhibition of bacterial
growth around the disc.
Selection of media
Medium that supports both test and control strains is selected for
carrying out antibiotic susceptibility testing.
For example:
Muller-Hinton agar is used for gram-negative bacilli and
staphylococcus spp.
Blood agar is used for streptococcus spp and enterococcus spp.
Chocolate agar is used for Haemophilus influenzae
Wellcotest medium uses antibiotics sulfonamide and cotrimoxazole
Mueller -Hinton agar is most commonly used medium for antibiotic
sensitivity testing Type of disc diffusion test.
Disc diffusion tests are following types :?
i)    Kirby-Bauer disc diffusion method - most commonly used.
ii) Stoke disc diffusion method
iii) Primary disc diffusion test
  689. Shadow casting is used in -
   a) Light microscopy

   b) Electron microscopy

   c) Optical microscopy

   d) Fluoroscence microspopy



   Correct Answer - B
   Ans. is 'b' i.e., Electron microscopy [Ref Cell and molecular
   biology p.726]
   Two standard methods of staining in electron microscopy are :
1. Shadow casting
2. Negative staining
690. Modified Ziehl-neelsen staining is used
     for:
 a) Mycobacterium tuberculosis

 b) Mycobacterium bovis

 c) Nocardia

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is. 'd' i. e., All of the above
691. Viral DNA is integrated into Bacterial
     DNA in:
 a) Transduction

 b) Lysogenic conversion

 c) Transformation

 d) Conjugation



Correct Answer - B
Ans. (b) Lysogenic conversion
692. Frozen phenomenon is used for -
 a) Sterilization of heat sensitive material

 b) Killing thermophilic bacteria

 c) Preservation of microorganisms

 d) Stimulating metabolism of microorganism



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Preservation of microorganisms
[Ref Microbiology Application Based Approach p. 189]
Some psychrophilic bacteria can grow at 0°C, but subzero
temperatures will inhibit the metabolism of microorganism in general.
Freezing is commonly used to preserve foods, drugs and laboratory
specimens because it effectively stops microbial growth.
However, subzero temperature may not kill microorganism
(especially psychrophilic) and may in fact preserve them along with
the material being frozen.
This phenomenon has been used by microbiologists to store and
preserve microorganisms.
   693. True about universal precautions are all
        except -
    a) To prevent transmission of blood borne pathogens

    b) Includes use of hand washing

    c) Consider that all body fluids are contaminated with blood

    d) Includes use of gloves and masks



   Correct Answer - B
   Ans. is 'b' i.e., Includes use of hand washing [Ref Microbiology
   for surgical techniques p. 796]
   Hand washing is a part of standard precautions not universal
   precautions
   Universal precautions
   Universal precautions is an approach to infection control to treat all
   human blood and certain human body fluids as if they were known to
   be infectious with HIV, HBV and other blood borne pathogens.
   Blood borne pathogen standard requires.
   Employees to observe 'universal precautions'to prevent contact with
   blood or other potentially infectious material (OPIM)
   Treat all blood and OPIM with proper precautions like use of gloves,
   masks and gown.
   Other potentially infectious material includes :
1. Body fluids: CSF, semen, vaginal secretion, synovial fluid, pleural
   fluid, pericardial fluid, peritoneal fluid, amniotic fluid, saliva in dental
   procedures, any body fluid contaminated with blood.
2. Any unfixed tissue or organ (other than skin) from human.
3. HIV - containing cells, fluids or cultures.
   Universal precautions have been updated into standard precautions
   that state all body fluid (except sweat) should be considered
infectious.
694. Nucleic acid is not found in -
 a) Virus

 b) bacteria

 c) Fungus

 d) Prions



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Prions [Ref Harrison 19' /e p. 451 & 17th/e p.2647]
Prions are infectious particle which contains protein only.
They do not have nucleic acid.
695. Granulomatosis infantiseptica is caused
     by:
 a) Pseudomonas

 b) Chlamydia trachomatis

 c) Group D streptococci

 d) Listeria



Correct Answer - D
Granulomatosis infantiseptica is an intra-uterine infection of the
newborn caused by listeria.
The predominant feature of this condition is extensive focal necrosis
affecting especially the liver and, less often, the lungs.
The mortality rate is very high.
Occasionally meningitis may be associated with it.
The organisms can be isolated from the affected areas in the child
and frequently from the genital tract of the mother, who may or may
not manifest the disease.

Ref: Harrisons principles of internal medicine, 18th edition, Page:
1196.
696. Salmonella and shigella can be
     differentiated from other
     enterobacteriaceae member by isolation
     on:
 a) MacConkey agar

 b) Mannitol salt agar

 c) BCYE medium

 d) XLD agar



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is. 'd' i. e. XLD agar
XLD (xyloseJysine deoxycholate) agar is a selective differential
medium for isolation of Gram-negative enteric pathogens
from fecal specimens and other clinical material.
o It is especially suitablefor the isolation of shigella and salmonella
specias
697. True about anthrax toxin are all except:
 a) Has three fractions

 b) Increase cAMP

 c) Coded by plasmid

 d) Inhibits protein synthesis



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is. 'd' i. e. Inhibits protein synthesis
698. Chlamydia pneumoniae causes causes:
 a) LGV

 b) Atherosclerosis

 c) Inclusion conjunctivitis

 d) Trachoma



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is. 'b' i. e., Atherosclerosis
699. Not ture about El Tor biotype of vibrio
     cholerae?
 a) Lower mortality

 b) Less SAR

 c) Less chances of survival in environment

 d) VP (+)



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Less chances of survival in environment
700. True about vibrio parahemolyticus ?
 a) Polar flagella

 b) Non halophilic vibrio

 c) Non-capsulated

 d) Requires NaCI



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Requires NaCI
It is halophilic vibrio.
* Inhabits the coastal sea, where it isfound inftshes arthopods such
as shrimps and ctabs and molluscs such as oyster.
* It resembles the cholera vibrio except that:
      --> It is capsulated.
    --> Shows bipolar staining
* Produces peritrichous flagella when grown on solid mediun (V.
cholerae has polar flagella), in liquid medium polar flagella are
formed.
* It grows, only in media containing NaCl, optimum conc.is 2-4
%, lts enteropathogenic is closely linked to
its ability to cause hemolysis on Wagatsuma agar t the Kanagawa
phenomenon.
701. Hansen's bacillus is cultured in:
 a) L J medium

 b) Robertson's cooked meat medium

 c) Foot pad of mice

 d) Sabraud's agar



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is. 'c' i. e., Foot pad of mice
702. Tennis racket cells is seen in -
 a) Sarcoma botyroides

 b) Vaginal adenocarcinoma

 c) Leiomyoma uterus

 d) Seminoma



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Sarcoma botryoids
o Tumor cells of sarcoma botryoids are small and have oval nuclei,
with small protrusions of cytoplasm from one end, so they resemble
a tennis racket.
703. Most common organism involved in
     nosocomial infection -
 a) Staph aureus

 b) E. coli

 c) Legionella

 d) Strep pneumonia



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Staph aureus
. UTI is the most common type of nosocomial infection.
.    Most common cause of UTI ---> E coli
. Most common cause of UTI in ICU ----> Candida
. Overall staph aureus is a leading cause of nosocomial infection.
. Staph aureus is the most common cause of surgical wound
infection -
. Most common cause of primary bacteremia --> Coagulase
negative staphylococcus.
704. Draughtsman colonies are seen with:
 a) Anthrax

 b) Pnuemococci

 c) Pertussis

 d) Yersenia



Correct Answer - B
Pnuemococci
Due to alpha hemolysk, colonies of pneumococci rcsemble colonies
of Str. virtdans. But on further incubation the colonies
ofpneumococci become flat with raised edges and central
umbonation, so that concentric rings are seen on the surface when
viewed from above - draughtsman or Carrom coin appearance.
705. All are true about chromobacteritun
     violaceum except?
a) Gram negative

b) Produces violet-colored pigment

c) Normal flora in human

d) Causes cellulitis



Correct Answer - C
Ans. c. Normal flora in human
706. Oil paint appearance on nutrient agar is
     seen in -
 a) Streptococcus pyogenes

 b) Staphylococcus aureus

 c) Bordtella pertussis

 d) H. influenzae



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Staphylococcus aureus
Staphylococcus is facultative anaerobe. Optimum pH for growth is
7.4 - 7.6 and optimum temperature is 37°C.
Staph aureus produces golden yellow pigment, which is maximum at
22°C.
Most of the staphylococcus species grow in the presence of 10%
NaCl
707. Streptococcal pneumoniae pneumonia
     present at -
 a) < 5 years

 b) 5 - 15 years

 c) 20 - 25 years

 d) 30 - 40 years



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., < 5 years [Ref: Textbook of Microbiology by
Parija p.197]
Streptococcus pneumoniae is the leading cause of pneumonia, both
lobar and bronchopneumonia.
Pneumonia is common at the extereme of ages :
Children (especially < 5 years of age)
Elderly (> 60-65 years)
Serotypes 6, 14, 18, 19 and 23 are responsible for most cases of
pneumonia in children, while serotypes 1, 3, 4, 7, 8 and 12 cause
pneumonia in        adults.
708. Most common age group affected by
     streptococcus pyogenes -
 a) < 5 years

 b) 5 - 15 years

 c) 20 - 25 years

 d) 30 - 40 years



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., 5 - 15 years [Ref Parija p. 191]
Sore throat (tonsillitis) is the most common manifestation of
streptococcal infection and affects 5-15 years age group.
709. Naegler's reaction is due to:
 a) Coagulase

 b) Hyaluronidase

 c) Lecithinase

 d) None of the above



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is. 'c' i. e. Lecithinase
710. Oropharyngeal commensal which
     predisposes to candidiasis -
 a) Hemophilus influenzae

 b) Streptococcus

 c) Staphylococcus

 d) Lactobacillus



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Streptococcus [Ref Textbook of polymicrobial
disease - Chapter 18]
An example of the complexity of coaggregation may be the range of
intergeneric coaggregations occuring between the oral fungal
pathogen candida albicans and other oral species that may play an
important role in the colonization of the oral cavity by candida
albicans.
Although streptococcal species, namely, streptococcus gordonii,
streptococcus oralis and streptococcus sanguins, exhibit the highest
affinities for C albicans, C albicans (as well as Candida dubliniensis)
have been shown to coaggregate with Fusobacterium species in
suspension.
Actinomyces has also been shown to coaggreate with candida
albicans.
711. Primary complex of M bovis involves:
 a) Tonsil and lung

 b) Tonsil and intestine

 c) Tonsil and skin

 d) Skin and Intestine



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is. 'b' i. e., Tonsil and intestine
Ans. is. 'b' i. e., Tonsil and intestine
Primary complex of M tuberculosis (infection by inhalation)
   i) Lung lesion
   ii) Enlarged hilar lymph nodes
o Primary complex of M bovis (infection by drinking milk)
       i) Tonsil
       ii) Cervical nodes or intestine (ileocecal region and
mesentric lymph nodes)
712. Hemophilus parainfluenzae requres -
 a) Factor V

 b) Factor X

 c) Factor V & X

 d) Factor VII



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Factor V [Ref: Ananthanaran 9" /e p. 327 & 8thie
p. 330]
H. influenzae, H. aegyptius, H. haemolyticus → Factor X & V.
H. Parainfluenzae, H. Parahemolyticus, H. Paraphrophilus → Factor
V.
H. ducreyi, H. aphrophilus → Factor X.
713. Brill-Zinsser disease is:
 a) Recrudescent of R prowazekii infection

 b) Recrudescent of R typhi infection

 c) Recrudescent of R conorii infection

 d) None



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is. 'b' i. e., Recrudescent of R typhi infection
714. All are true about listeria except:
 a) Gram positive

 b) PALCAM agar is used for isolation

 c) Characteristic tumbling motility at 37°C

 d) Umbrella shaped growth



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is. 'c' i. e., Characteristic tumbling motility at 37°C
L. monocytogenes is a gram-positive'
coccobacillus'(coccoid rod) with a tendency to occur in chains.
Peritrichous flagella are produced by the bacillus optimally at 20-
30°C but only scantily or not at all at 37°C
Culture media used for isolation are blood agar, chocolate agar,
and PALCAM agar.
It grows on ordinary media within a temperature range of 1° to 45°C.
Most cases of human disease are caused by serotypes 1/2a, 1/2b
and 4b.
The organism can be found as a part of the gastrointestinal flora in
healthy individuals.
Human disease due to L. monocytogenes generally occurs in the
setting of pregnancy or immunosuppression.
715. Listeria resists phagocytosis in
     phagosomes (phagolysosomes) due to:
 a) β-hemolysin

 b) Caspases

 c) Cell membrane adhesion molecules

 d) Opacity associated protein (OAP)



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is. 'a' i. e., β-hemolysin
  Most important step in pathogenesis of listeriosis is the survival and
multiplication of L monocytogenes in phagocytes (macrophages),
host epithelial cells and hepatocytes.
* The most importaflt deterrminant of pathogenesis k
listeriolysin O (LLO), A beta- hemolysin . LLO causes lysis of
membrane of phagosomes within phagocytes and
helps in intracellular survival of L monocytogenes.
* Iron is an important virulence factor. Listeria produce siderophores
and are able to obtain iron from transferrin. Immunity to
listeria is primary cell mediated. Immunity can be transferred by
sensitized lymphocytes but not by antibodies.
716. Most common form of leptospirosis:
a) Weil's disease

b) Icteric form

c) Hepatorenal form

d) Anicteric form



Correct Answer - D
Ans. (d) Anicteric form
It is most common (90%) and mild form. Most
commonfindingkfner with conjunctival suftrcion
717. Bacteria that can grow even in the
     presence of antiseptic:
 a) Staphylococcus

 b) Streptococcus

 c) E. coli

 d) Pseudomonas



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is. 'd' i. e., Pseudomonas
718. A chronic alcoholic is presenting with
     clinical features of meningitis. Most
     likely organism which will grow on CSF
     culture:
a) Streptococcus pneumoniae

b) N. meningitidis

c) Listeria monocytogenes

d) F. coli



Correct Answer - A
Streptococcus pneumoniae
719. Vincent's angina is caused by Borrelia
     vincentii along with:
 a) Lactobacillus

 b) Lactobacillus

 c) Fusobacterium

 d) Bacteroides



Correct Answer - C
Ans. (c) Fusobacterium
720. Bartonella quintana causes:
 a) Trench fever

 b) Scrub typhus

 c) Endemic typhus

 d) Epidemic typhus



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is. 'a' i. e., Trench fever
721. What is trench fever:
 a) Q-fever

 b) 5-days fever

 c) Boutonneuse fever

 d) Indian tick typhus



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is. 'b' i. e., 5-days fever
722. Protein A of staphylococcus binds to
 a) IgA

 b) IgG

 c) IgD

 d) IgE



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is. b. IgG
723. Which streptodornase is most antigenic
     in human beings:
 a) A

 b) B

 c) C

 d) D



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is. b. B
724. Pneumonic plague is spread by:
 a) Bite of infected flae

 b) Direct contact with infected tissue

 c) Ingestion of contaminated food

 d) Droplet infection



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is. 'd' i. e., Droplet infection
725. Proteus isolated from a patient of UTI will
     show which boichemical reaction:
 a) Phenylpyruvic acid reaction

 b) Bile esculin reaction

 c) Colchicine sensitivity

 d) Bacitracin sensitivity



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is. 'a' i. e., Phenylpyruvic acid reaction
stofthemexceptprovidenciastrains,producepowerfulurease.
--> A characterstic feature ofproteus bacilli is "PPA reaction'
--> It is due to presence of enzyme pheny'alanine deaminasewhich
converts phenylalanine to phenyl pymvic acid
726. Not true about gas gangrene:
 a) Most common cause is Cl perfringens

 b) Extensive necrosis of muscles

 c) Cl perfringens produce heat-labile spores

 d) Metronidazole is the drug of choice



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is. 'd' i. e. Metronidazole is the drug of choice
727. Most sensitive test in syphilis -
 a) VDRL

 b) TP-PA

 c) RPR

 d) FTA-ABS



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., TP-PA [Ref Harrison Mole p. 1137, 1138
e.7 18th/e p. 1385, Ananthanarayan 9th/e p. 374, 375 & p. 374-78]
TPPA is the most sensitive serological test overall (considering all
stages of syphilis).
All the serological tests have 100% sensitivity in secondary stage of
syphilis
       Test Primary Secondary Latent Tertiary
    VDRL / 78 (74-        100      95 (88- 71 (37-
       RPR     87)                  100)       94)
      FTA - 84 (70-       100       100         96
       ABS 100)
  TP – PA       89        100       100        NA
728. Most common site for staphylococcus
     carrier:
 a) Skin

 b) Nose

 c) Oropharynx

 d) Perineum



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is. b. Nose
729. Brazilian purpuric fever is caused by:
 a) Bordetella pertussis

 b) Haemophilus aegypticus

 c) Haemophilus duceryi

 d) Haemophilus parinfluenzae



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is. 'b' i. e., Haemophilus aegypticus
730. Eschar is seen in all the Rickettsial
     diseases excent:
 a) Scrub typhus

 b) Rickettsial pox

 c) Indian tick typhus

 d) Endemic typhus



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is. 'd' i. e., Endemic typhus
731. Fresh water swimming leads to infection
     by -
 a) Bordetella pertussis

 b) Corynebacterium diphtheriae

 c) M tuberculosis

 d) Pseudomonas



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is `d' i.e., Pseudomonas [Ref Alcamo's fundamentals of
microbiology p. 669]
"Extended swimming in fresh water pools can irritate and break
down skin in the ear canal allowing bacteria such as pseudomonas,
staphylococcus or streptococcus to penetrate and cause otitis
externa"
Pseudomonas is the most common cause of swimmer's ear
infection.
Pseudomonas also causes "hot tub rash" syndrome or hot-tub
folliculitis, associated with use of hot tub, less commonly associated
with whirlpools or swimming pools.
732. Commonest cause for puerperal sepsis
     is :
 a) Streptococci

 b) Anaerobes

 c) Gonococci

 d) Staphylococci



Correct Answer - A
Streptococci
733. Most common complication of diphtheria
     is -
 a) Myocarditis

 b) Pneumonia

 c) Meningitis

 d) Endocarditis



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Myocorditis [Ref With text]
"Myocarditis is the most common complication of diphtheria and the
leading cause of death in diphtheric cases, whose incidence is 10-
25%"
Essentials in Microbiology "Complications of diphtheria include
myocarditis (the most common complication), thrombocytopenia,
vocal card paralysis and neuritis" → Clinical microbiology.
"Most common complications of diphtheria are myocarditis and toxic
neuritis" → NMS
Two most common complications of diphtheria are :
1. Myocarditis
2. Toxin neuritis → Paralysis of soft palate is the most common
manifestation of neuritis.
  734. All are true about anaerobic infection
       except -
    a) Most infections are endogenous

    b) Exudates and swabs are best for culture

    c) Specimen for UTI is suprapubic aspiration

    d) They are found normally on skin and GIT



   Correct Answer - B
   Ans. is 'b' i.e., Exudates and swabs are best for culture [Ref
   Essentials of microbiology p.224]
   Most anaerobic bacteria that cause infection are members of our
   normal indigenous flora and anaerobic infections are usually
   endogenous, caused by tissue invosion by bacteria normally
   resisdent or respective body surfaces.
   Anaerobic bacteria are normally present on skin, mouth,
   nasopharynx, upper respiratory tract, gut and vagina.
   Ideal specimens for anaerobic cultures are samples of needle
   aspirates and proper tissue specimens. Anaerobic swabs are usually
   discouraged.
   Important specimens are :-
1. Local abscess : Needle aspirates.
2. Pulmonary : Transtracheal aspirates, lung aspirates, pleural fluid,
   protected bronchial wash.
3. Abdominal : Abdominal abscess aspirate.
4. Urinary tract : Suprapubic bladder aspirate.
5. Genital tract : Culdocentesis specimen, endometrial swabs.
6. CNS : CSF, Aspirate of abscess
735. Most common route of infection in
     pasteurella cellulitis -
 a) Animal bites or scratches

 b) Aerosols or dust

 c) Contaminated tissue

 d) Human to human



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Animal bites or scratches [Ref Ananthanarayan
9th le p. 325; 7h/e p. 326; Harrison 19thle p. 830 & le/e p. 1235]
Transmission to humans may occur by two routes?
1) Direct inoculation through skin
The most common mode of transmission of P.microcida is direct
inoculation by a bite or scratch. Most of the infections are caused by
cats.
Infection may also occur via deposition of organism on injured skin
or mucosal surfaces during licking.
2) Through the respiratory tract
This is the second most common mode of transmission.
Infection via the respiratory tract occurs from contact with
contaminated dust or infectious droplets (aerosol dust).
736. True about legionella:
 a) Most common mode of transmission is aerosol inhala​tion

 b) There is no man to man transmission

 c) Prolonged carrier are common

 d) All are true



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is. 'b' i. e., There is no man to man transmission
737. Hebra nose is caused by:
 a) Frisch bacillus

 b) Staph aureus

 c) Pseudomonas

 d) C. diphtheriae



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is. 'a' i. e., Frisch bacillus
738. Granuloma inguinale is caused by:
a) H. ducreyi

b) Chlamydia trachomatis

c) Treponema pallidum

d) Calymmatobacterium



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is. 'd' i. e., Calymmatobacterium
Granuloma lenerutn (granuloma inguinal) --> Calymmatobacterium
739. Izumi fever is caused by:
 a) Pseudomonas aeruginosa

 b) Burkholderia mallei

 c) Yersinia pseudotuberculosis

 d) Pasteurella multocida



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is. 'c' i. e., Yersinia pseudotuberculosis
740. True about widal test:
 a) Anti-0 antibody persists longer

 b) 0 antigen of S. paratyphi is used

 c) H-antigen is most immunogenic

 d) Felix tube is used for 'H' agglutination lnar



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is. 'c' i. e., H-antigen is most immunogenic
741. Absence of Vi-antibody in a typhoid
     patient has:
 a) Good prognosis

 b) Bad prognosis

 c) No relation with prognosis

 d) Indicates widal negative



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is. 'b' i. e., Bad prognosis
742. Clinical significance of Vi antigen of S.
     typhi is:
 a) Helps in diagnosis

 b) Highly immunogenic

 c) Most important antigen for widal test

 d) Antibody against Vi-antigen is used for diagnosis of carrier



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is. 'd' i. e., Antibody against Vi-antigen is used for diagnosis of
carrier
743. Non-motile bacterium is -
 a) Vibrio

 b) Clostridium septicum

 c) Clostridium perfringens

 d) Legionella



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Clostridium perfringens [Ref Ananthanarayan
9th/e p.262, 263, 252-257]
All clostridia are motile by peritrichous flagella except C/ tetani VI
and Cl perfringens which are non-motile.
744. Which of the following is non-motile:
 a) Pseudomonas aeruginosa

 b) Burkholderia mallei

 c) Burkholderia pseudomallei

 d) None of the above



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is. 'b' i. e., Burkholderia mallei
745. Phagocytosis of mycobacterium
     tuberculosis by macro​phages is mainly
     mediated by:
 a) IL 6

 b) IL 3

 c) IL 12

 d) IFN Gamma



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is. 'd' i. e., IFN Gamma
746. Not true about Vi polysaccharide vaccine
     of typhoid:
 a) Single dose is given

 b) Revaccination at 3 years

 c) Given at birth

 d) Given subcutaneously



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is. 'c' i. e., Given at birth
747. Ehrlichia phagocytophila mainly affects -
 a) RBC

 b) Platelets

 c) Neutrophils

 d) Macrophages



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Neutrophils [Ref Essentials of clinical
microbiology p. 712]
Anaplasma phagocytophilum (formerly known as Ehrlichia
phagocytophila) is a causative agent of tick-borne fever in sheep
and pasture fever in cattle.
It is an obligate intracellular bacterium whose main target is
neutrophils but it can also infect monocytes.
748. Test to differentiate staphylococci from
     micrococci:
 a) Catalase test

 b) Coagulase test

 c) Novobiosin sensitivity

 d) Oxidation fermentation



Correct Answer - D
Oxidation fermentation
749. Not true about corynebacterium
     hormannii
 a) A diphtheroid

 b) Non-pathogenic saprophyte

 c) Toxigenic

 d) Also known as C pseudodiphthericum



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is. 'c' i. e. Toxigenic
750. True about corynebacterium diphtheriae:
 a) All types produce toxin

 b) Toxin production is dependent upon critical concentration of
    iron

 c) Heat stable toxin

 d) Inhibit cAMP



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is. 'b' i. e. Toxin production is dependent upon critical
concentration of iron
  751. Bile esculin agar is used for ?
    a) Group A streptococcus

    b) Group B streptococcus

    c) Group C streptococcus

    d) Enterococcus



   Correct Answer - D
   Ans. is 'd' i.e., Enterococcus
   Enterococcus
   Majority of the infections are caused by E. faecalis and E. faecium.
   Less frequently isolated species are E. gallinarum, E. durans, E.
   hirae and E. avium.
   Enterococci are normal inhabitants of the large bowel of human
   adults, although they usually make up < 1% of the culturable
   intestinal microflora.
   They are catalase negative (as all streptococci).
   Their characteristic feature is that they can grow in presence of
   :?
1. 40% bile
2. 6.5% Sodium chloride
3. At pH 9.6
4. At 45°C (relative heat resistant surving 60°C for 30 minutes)
5. In 0-1% methylene blue milk
   They hydrolyze esculin. They grow in presence of 40% bile and
   hydrolyze esculin → Bile esculin positive.
   They are PYR (Pyrrolidonyl Arylamidase) positive.
   They are usually non-hemolytic (gamma-hemolytic), but some-times
   may show alpha or beta hemolysis.
752. Heating at 60°C for 30 minute would
     isolate:
 a) Staphylococci

 b) Enterococci

 c) Micrococci

 d) Streptococci



Correct Answer - B
Enterococci
753. Which of the following belongs to
     Herpesviridae:
 a) Variola

 b) Adenovirus

 c) HPV

 d) RK virus



Correct Answer - D
Ans. d. RK virus
754. HIV envelop is formed by:
 a) Host cell

 b) Virus

 c) Both

 d) None



Correct Answer - C
Ans. c. Both
755. Which HIV-virus is more dangerous:
 a) HIV-1

 b) HIV-2

 c) Both are same

 d) It depends on host factors



Correct Answer - A
Ans. a. HIV-1
756. Most common mode of transmission of
     HIV sexual transmission:
 a) Blood & blood products

 b) Occupational

 c) Perinatal

 d) Breast feeding



Correct Answer - A
Ans. a. Blood & blood products
757. Which viral gene acts as carcinogen in
     causing carcinoma cervix -
 a) P 24 - gene

 b) E - gene

 c) L - gene

 d) H - gene



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., E-gene [Ref Harrison 150/e p. 1199-1200]
HPV is the most important cause of cervical cancer.
Products of E-genes (E6, E7) are related to immortalization or
malignant transformation of keratinocytes by interfering with p53 and
Rb genes, respectively
758. Which influenzae strain, not of human
     origin and can cause pandemic:
 a) Hi Ni


 b) H2 N2

 c) H5 Ni


 d) H9 Ni



Correct Answer - C
Ans. c. H5 N1
759. True about influenza vaccine:
 a) Live vaccine is used most commonly

 b) Live vaccine is given by nasal drops

 c) Killed vaccine is given intramuscular in deltoid

 d) All are correct



Correct Answer - B
Ans-B
Live attenuated vaccines--> These are used as nasal drops
Killed vaccine --> It is used mosf commonly. It is given
subcutaneously in 2 doses, 3-4 weeks apart. Protective efficacy is
70-90% and duration of protection is 3-6 months.
760. Which of the following can infect ovary -
 a) Mumps virus

 b) EBV

 c) CMV

 d) Measles virus



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Mumps virus [Ref Clinical microbiology p. 273]
Mumps begins as a primary infection in the respiratory tract and
spreads by viremia to glandular tissues including the salivary glands,
pancreas, testes and ovaries.
761. Which is not a poxvirus:
 a) Vaccinia virus

 b) Molluscum contagiosum

 c) Tanapox virus

 d) Coxsackie virus



Correct Answer - D
Ans. d. Coxsackie virus
   762. Integration of viral genome into host cell
        chromosome can leads to -
    a) Malignancy

    b) Latency

    c) Altered growth

    d) All of the above



   Correct Answer - D
   Ans. is 'd' i.e., All of the above [Ref Clinical microbiology p. 312]
   Integration of viral genomes into host cell chromosome can cause
   alteration in :
1. Host cell surface
2. Metabolic function
3. Cell growth and replication pattern
4. Malignant transformation
5. Latent infection
   763. Not true about paramyxoviruses -
    a) Belong to family myxovirus

    b) Are DNA viruses

    c) Have linear nucleic acid

    d) Antigenically stable



   Correct Answer - B
   Ans. is 'b' i.e., Are DNA viruses [Ref Ananthanarayan 9`h/e p.
   497-498]
   Myxoviruses are enveloped RNA viruses.
   They are characterized by ability to adsorb on to mucoprotein
   (affinity for mucin) on erythrocytes causing agglutination of
   erythocytes.
   Major route of infection of all these virus is respiratory route by
   droplet infection.
   Myxovirus are divided into two important families ?
1. Orthomyxovirus → Influenza
2. Paramyxovirus → Mumps, measles, RSV, Parainfluenza virus
   764. HTLV-1 can be transmitted by -
    a) Blood transfusion

    b) Droplet inhalation

    c) Contaminated water

    d) Animal bite



   Correct Answer - A
   Ans. is 'a' i.e., Blood transfusion [Ref Manual of clinical
   microbiology Vol.1 p.1131]
   HTLV-1 and HTLV-2 infections are transmitted by?
1. Sexually (mainly by males to female)
2. Vertically (from mother to child by prolonged breast feeding)
3. Parenterally (through drug use and blood transfusion)
765. True about rotavirus vaccine:
 a) Killed vaccine

 b) Given subcutaneous

 c) Pentavalent vaccine

 d) Should be given before 5 years



Correct Answer - C
Ans. c. Pentavalent vaccine
766. Von Magnus phenomenon -
 a) Is a normal replicative cycle

 b) Virus yield has low hemagglutination

 c) Virus has high infectivity

 d) Virus yields has high hemagglutination titre but low infectivity



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e. virus yields has high hemagglutination titre but low
infectivity
Abnormal replicative cycles of viruses
. Von magnus phenomenon when cells are infected with a high dose
of influenza virus, there is defective assembly during replication and
the
produced virus has high hemagglutinin titre but low infectivity.
. Abortive infection Due to defective maturation or assembly, either
no release of virons occur or the progeny of virus is noninfectious.
. Defective viruses Some viruses are genetically defective and
require help of simultaneously infected helper virus for replication.
eg.
HDV, Rous sarcoma virus.
767. Trypanosoma cruzi is transmitted by:
 a) Tse tse fly

 b) Reduviid bug

 c) Culex mosquito

 d) Sand fly



Correct Answer - A
Ans. a. Tse tse fly
768. Duodenal aspirate is used in diagnosis
     of:
 a) E histolytica

 b) Giardia lamblia

 c) Taenia solium

 d) Leishmania



Correct Answer - B
Ans. b. Giardia lamblia
Duodenal aspirate is used for G lambia, o sinesis, F heptica, and S
stercoralis.
769. Amoebiasis is not transmitted by:
 a) Feco-oral route

 b) Sexual transmission

 c) Blood and blood products

 d) Vector transmission



Correct Answer - D
Ans. d. Vector transmission
770. Recrudescences are commonly seen in
     which malaria:
 a) P vivax

 b) P ovale

 c) P malariae

 d) P falciparum



Correct Answer - D
Ans. d. P falciparum
771. River blindness is caused by -
 a) Onchocerca

 b) Loa loa

 c) Ascaris

 d) B. malayi



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Onchocerca
Onchocerciasis is also known as River blindness and Robles
disease.
772. Which of the following cell types are the
     most potent activator of T-cell ?
 a) Bell

 b) Follicular Dendritic Cells

 c) Mature dendritic cells

 d) Macrophages



Correct Answer - C
Ans. (c) Mature Dendritic cells Ref. Robins 8/e, p 192, Harrison 18/e,
                                   p 2657
  "Mature dendritic cells are the most potent activator of naive T-cell"
Dendritic Cells:
Bone marrow derived cells
There are two types of cells with dendritic morphology:
-     Interdigitating dendritic cells
-     Follicular dendritic cells
Interdigitating dendritic cells or just dendritic cells are the most
important antigen presenting cells for initiating pri​mary immune
response against protein antigens. This is due to following reasons:
-     These cells are located at the right place to capture antigens ,
i.e. under epithelia, in the interstitial of all tissue.
-     They express variety of receptors (including TLR, mannose) for
capturing microbes.
-     In response to microbes dendritic cells express the same
chemokine receptors as to naive T-cells.
-     They express high levels of MHC class II molecules as well as
co-stimulatory molecules B.7-1 and B.7-2. Or in
other words they possess all the machinery needed for presenting
antigens to and activating CD4 + T cells.
On the other hand follicular dendritic cells (does not arise from bone
marrow) are present in the germinal centres of lymphoid follicles
where they trap antigens bound to antibodies or complement.
Follicular dendritic cells plays a role in ongoing immune response by
presenting antigens to B-cells and selecting the B-cells that have the
highest affinity for the antigen.
773. Thymus dependent area in spleen -
a) Mantel layer

b) Perifollicular region

c) Malphigian corpuscle

d) All of the above



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Malphigian corpuscle
Thymus dependent (T- Thymus independent (B-
cells collect)             cells collection)
1. Spleen                  1. Spleen
Periarterial lymphoid      Perifollicular region
collect                    Mantel layer
Malphigian corpuscle in 2. Lymph node
white pulp                 Cortical follicles
2. Lymph node              Germinal centres
Paracortical area          Medullary cords
774. Precipitation in comparison to
     agglutination requires -
 a) Less pH

 b) High temperature

 c) Specific enzyme

 d) Soluble antigen



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e.,Soluble antigen [Ref Ananthanarayan 9tVe p.
105]merav
775. True about VDRL test -
 a) Non - specific

 b) Slide flocculation test

 c) Best followed for drug therapy

 d) All



Correct Answer - D
Ans is 'd' i.e., All
776. Rose waaler test is -
 a) Complement fixation test

 b) Pricipitation in gel

 c) Ring precipitation

 d) Passive hemagglutination test



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Passive hemogglutination test [Ref
Ananthanarayan 8th /e p. 107, 108, Harrison 18th/e p. 1469, 1470]
777. Weil felix reaction in scrub typhus is/are
     positive for:
 a) OX -19

 b) OX-2

 c) Both OX -19 & OX-2

 d) OX -K

 e) OX -19, OX-2 & OX -K



Correct Answer - D
Ans: d. OX -K [Ref Ananthanarayan 9th/410; Medical
Microbiology by Greenwood 16th/373]
This reaction is an agglutination test in which sera are tested for
agglutinins to the 0 antigens of certain non-motile Proteus strains
OX-19, OX-2 & OX-X
The basis of test is the sharing of an alkali-stable carbohydrate
antigen by some rickettsiae & by certain strains of proteus, P.
vulgaris OX 19 & OX 2 & P.mirabilis OX K.
disease OX-19             OX-2       OX-K
Epidemic
           +++            +          _
typhus
Brill-     Usually(–
Zinsser ve)or weakly                 -
disease (+ve)
Endemic
           +++            +/-        -
typhus
Tickborne
spotted ++                ++         -
fever
fever
Scrub
         -   -   +++
typhus
778. Complement Fixation test is:
     September 2005
 a) VIDAL

 b) Coombs test

 c) Wassermann reaction

 d) VDRL



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C: Wassermann reaction
The complement fixation test (CFT) was extensively used in syphilis
serology after being introduced by Wasserman in 1906. However,
there is now a trend to replace the CFT with the simple flocculation
tests.
Although CFT is considered to be a relatively simple test, it is a very
exacting procedure because 5 variables are involved. In essence the
test consists of two antigen-antibody reactions, one of which is the
indicator system.
The first reaction, between a known virus antigen and a specific
antibody takes place in the presence of a predetermined amount of
complement. The complement is removed or "fixed" by the antigen-
antibody complex.
The second antigen-antibody reaction consists of reacting sheep
RBC with haemolysin. When this indicator system is added to the
reactants, the sensitized RBCs will only lyse in the presence of free
complement. The antigens used for CFT tend to be group antigens
rather than type-specific antigens. In order for the CFT to be set up
correctly, the optimal concentration of haemolytic serum,
complement, and antigen should be determined by titration.
The Wassermann test is no longer in use.
779. Example of precipitation test is
 a) Rose waaler test

 b) Widal test

 c) Latex agglutination

 d) Kahn test



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Kahn test
It is a Heterophile tube agglutination test, used to diagnose
Rickettsiae.
780. Which of the following complement
     factors is a marker of humoral rejection?
 a) C3d

 b) C3b

 c) C4d

 d) C5a



Correct Answer - C
Ans: C. C4d
(Ref: Robbins 9/e p234)
C4d factor is a marker for humoral rejection.
Acute antibody-mediated rejection is manifested mainly by damage
to glomeruli and small blood vessels.
Typically, the lesions consist of inflammation of glomeruli and
peritubular capillaries, associated with deposition of the complement
breakdown product C4d, which is produced during activation of the
complement system by the antibody- dependent classical pathway.
Small vessels may also show focal thrombosis.
  781. Primory T-cell deficiency is -
   a) Ecto- 5' nucleotidase deficiency

   b) Common variable immunodeficiency

   c) DiGeorge syndrome

   d) Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome



   Correct Answer - C
   Ans. is 'c' i.e.,Di George syndrome [Ref: Atlas of immunology p.
   537]
   I. Cellular immunodeficiencies (T cell defects)
1. Thymic hypoplasia (DiGeorge syndrome)
2. Chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis
3. Purine nucleoside phosphorylase (PNP) deficiency
   II. Combined immunodeficiencies (B and T cell defects)
1. Cellular immunodeficiency with abnormal immunoglobulin synthesis
   (Nezelof syndrome)
2. Ataxia telangiectasia
3. Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome
4. Immunodeficiency with thymoma
5. Immunodeficiency with short-limbed dwarfism
   782. Oakley - fulthorpe procedure is -
    a) Agglutination test

    b) Precipitation test

    c) Single diffusion in one dimension

    d) Double diffusion in one dimension



   Correct Answer - B:D
   Ans. is 'd > b' i.e., Double diffusion in one dimension >
   Precipitation test [Ref: Ananthanarayan 9th/e p. 105]
   Immunodiffusion tests are precipitation reaction in gels.
   Important examples of immunodiffusion test are :-
1. Oudin procedure -› single diffusion in one dimension.
2. Oakley fulthorpe procedure -, Double diffusion in one dimension
3. Mancini method or radial immunodiffusion -› Single diffusion in two
   dimensions.
4. Ochterlony procedure -› Double diffusion in two dimensions
783. Molecular mass of IgG [in K Da]
a) 150

b) 400

c) 1000

d) 1500



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e.,150
AntibodyMolecular mass (KDa)
IgG        150
IgA        160,400
IgM        950,1150
IgD        175
IgE        190
784. Haptens are immunogenic when they
     covalently bind to -
 a) Lipid carrier

 b) Polysaccharide carrier

 c) Protein carrier

 d) Any of the above carrier



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e.,Protein carrier [Ref Essentials of microbiology p.
91]
Hapten
Hapten is a substance, which itself is unable to induce antibody
synthesis, i.e non-immunogenic but may be able to react specifically
with antibody. Thus, hapten can function as antigen but not as
immunogen.
Haptens are incomplete antigens , which become complete antigens
when they covalently combine with carrier molecule or schleper.
After combination with carrier molecule, it becomes complete
antigen and can induce an immune response.
785. IgM appears in fetus at what gestational
     age -
 a) 10 weeks

 b) 20 weeks

 c) 30 weeks

 d) at birth



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., 20 weeks
IgM is the earliest immunoglobulin class to be synthesized by the
fetus, beginning at 20 weeks of age.
786. The serum concentration of which of the
     following human IgG subclass is
     maximum ?
 a) IgG 1

 b) IgG 2

 c) IgG 3

 d) IgG 4



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Ig G1 [Ref Ananthanarayan 9th/ep. 97 & 8`"/e p. 98;
Harrison 19m/e p. 372 & 18tVe p. 2674]
787. Example of neutrilization reaction -
 a) VDRL

 b) Widal test

 c) Kahn test

 d) Nagler reaction



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Nagler reaction [Ref Ananthanarayan 9th/e p.112]
Important neutralization tests are Nagler reaction, dick test and
schick test.
   788. Which does not stimulate active
        immunity -
    a) Subclinical infection

    b) Clinical infection

    c) Vaccination

    d) Transplacental antibody in newborn



   Correct Answer - D
   Ans. is 'd' i.e., Transplacental antibody in newborn [Ref
   Ananthanarayan 9th/e p. 81-83]
   Adaptive (acquired) immunity is of following types :?
   1) Active immunity
   It is so called because host's immune system actively produce
   immunity.
   Antigenic stimulus induces the immune system to produce
   antibodies or cellular immune response.
   Active immunity may be :-
1. Natural : Due to infection (either clinical or subclinical /inapparent)
2. Artificial : Vaccination (immunization)
   2) Passive immunity
   It is so called because antibodies are produced in another organism
   and then received passively by the host.
   Passive immunity may be :-
1. Natural : Transport of antibodies across the placenta from mother to
   fetus.
2. Acquired : Administration of immunoglobulin/Antibody.
789. Which is specific for acquired immunity
     ?
 a) Immunological memory

 b) Affected by genetic makeup

 c) No antigen exposure

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Immunological memory [Ref Harrison 19th/e p.
372]
Acquired (adaptive) immunity is found only in vertebrates
It is based on the generation of antigen receptors on T and B
lymphocytes by germ line gene rearrangements.
It is specific.
It is developed as a result of an antigenic stimulus (Immunological
priming)or by passive transfer of antibodies.
It provides immunological memory; subsequent antigen exposure
leads to more rapid and vigorous immune responses.
The adaptive immune system consist of dual limbs of cellular and
humoral immunity.
790. Lattice phenomenon is seen in -
 a) Neutrilization reaction

 b) Complement fixation test

 c) Precipitation test

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Precipitation test [Ref Textbook of clinical
microbiology p.785]
The lattice hypothesis was proposed by marrack (1934) to explain
the mechanism of precipitation.
According to this concept, multivalent antigens combine with bivalent
antibodies in varying proportion depending on the antigen-antibody
ratio in the reacting mixture.
Precipitation results when large lattice is formed consisting of
alternating antigen and antibody molecules. This is possible only in
the zone of equivalence.
In the zone of antigen or antibody excess, the lattice does not
enlarge, as the valencies of the antibody and the antigen, repectively
are fully satisfied. In either cases extensive lattice cannot be formed
and precipition is inhibited.
The lattice hypothesis holds good for agglutination also.
791. Complement deficiency has not been
     implicated in causing ?
 a) SLE

 b) PNH

 c) Hereditary angiodema

 d) Membranous nephritis



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Membranous nephritis [Ref Pariza 3'/e p. 121]
Complement deficiency and disease
Deficiency of early components (C1, C2, C4) causes immune -
complex diseases (e.g. SLE), and pyogenic infections.
Deficiency of C3 and C3b causes recurrent pyogenic infections.
Terminal complement component (C5 through Co) deficiencies and
deficiencies of the alternative pathway (Properdin, C3, Factor D)
have a strong effect on susceptibility to, as well as severity of,
neisserial infections.
Inherited deficiency of C, esterase inhibitor cases Hereditary
angioneurotic edema.
Acquired deficiency of Decay accelarating factor (DAF) causes
Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH). DAF is a regulator in
complement system which increases dissolution of C3 convertase
(C4b2a)
792. Which is not true about macrophages:
 a) Activation by IFN-y

 b) Major cells in chronic inflammation

 c) M2 type involved in inflammation

 d) Phagocytic cells



Correct Answer - C
Ans. c. M2 type involved in inflammation
  793. Prozone phenomenon is due to
    a) Antigen excess

    b) Antibody excess

    c) False +ve reaction

    d) False -ve reaction



   Correct Answer - B:D
   Ans. (b) and (d) Antibody excess and False-negative       Ref.
   Ananthanarayan 8/e, p 104, 9/ 105
   Zone phenomenon (seen in agglutination and precipitation) consists
   of 3 parts:
1. Prozone = Ab excess = weak or absent precipitation reaction =
   False -ve
2. Zone of equivalence = peak amount of precipitation.
3. Post zone = Ag excess = weak or absent precipitation reaction.
794. Monoclonal antibody binds to ?
 a) Epitope

 b) Paratope

 c) Both epitope and paratope

 d) None of the above



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Epitope [Ref : Ananthanarayan 9th/e p. 88 & 71* p.
81; Harrison 18thie p. 2673 & 17th/e p. 2036]
Epitope
Also known as "antigenic determinant".
It is antibody binding site of antigen.
795. When transfer factor is given as
     treatment results in -
 a) Natural active immunity

 b) Artificial active immunity

 c) Artificial passive immunity

 d) Adoptive immunity



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Adoptive immunity
796. Indirect Coomb's test detects:
 a) Antibodies attached to RBC Surface

 b) Antibodies in the serum

 c) Antigens attached to RBC Surface

 d) Antigens in the serum



Correct Answer - B
Answer is B (Antibodies in the serum)
Indirect Coomb's test detects IgG antibodies in the serum (e.g. Anti-
D Antibodies). Direct Coomb's test detects IgG Antibodies (or
complements) attached to the surface of RBCs.
Direct Antihuman Globulin Test        Detects RBCs sensitized with
IgG or Complements(C3B or C3d)
(DAT; Coomb's; Direct Coomb's)           Detects IgG Antibodies (or
complements) attached to the surface of RBCs.
Indirect Antihuman Globulin Test
Direct Coomb's Test
In the Direct Coomb's test, red blood cells (RBCs) sensitized with
IgG antibodies (or C3b, C3d) are agglutinated when Coomb's
reagent (Rabbit Anti-IgG antibody) is added to the test tube
Detects Antibodies in the Serum
 Indirect Coomb's Test In the Indirect Coomb's test IgG antibodies
(e.g. Anti-D) in the serum must first bind to blood group Type 0 Test
RBCs added to the test tube. Addition of Coombs Reagent, then
causes the sensitized Type 0 Test RBCs to agglutinate, indicating
that IgG antibodies are present in the serum.
797. Which of the following is not an in vivo
     test ?
 a) Elek's gel precipitation test

 b) Schick test

 c) Lepromin test

 d) Tuberculin test



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Elek's gel precipitation test [Ref Read below]
Elek's gel precipitation is an in vitro test for toxigenicity of C
diphtheriae.
Other three options are skin tests (i.e. in vivo tests).
798. Which of the following can be used for
     obtaining specimen for isolation of
     microorganism in laboratory diagnosis:
 a) Meningococcal rash

 b) Blood in staphylococcal food poisoning

 c) Throat swab in Rheumatic fever

 d) Blood in post-streptococcal GN



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is. a' i.e. Meningococcal rash
799. Morula form is seen in which infection ?
 a) Chlamydiae

 b) Bartonella quintana

 c) Mycoplasma hominis

 d) Ehrlichia



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e.,Ehrlichia [Ref Ananthanarayan h le p. 409;
Vasanthakumari p.310]
Ehrlichiae graw within phagosomes of phagocytes as mulberry-like
clusters called morula.
800. A child is presenting with vomiting and
     abdominal pain after 5 hours of eating
     some food. The most likely causa​tive
     orgonism:
 a) Bacillus cereus

 b) Cl. perfringens

 c) Cl. botalinum

 d) V. cholerae



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is. 'a' i. e. Bacillus cereus
   801. Prevention of catheter induced urinary
        tract infection is by ?
    a) Prophylactic antibiotics

    b) Use of face mask

    c) Closed drainage technique

    d) All of the above



   Correct Answer - C
   Ans. is 'c' i.e., Closed drainage technique [Ref Microbiology in
   clinical practice p.450]
   Prevention of catheter-associated infection depends on:
1. Aseptic catheter techniques.
2. Antiseptic lubricant containing chlorhexidine and local instillation of
   1% chlorhexidine into the bladder.
3. Closed drainage cathater technique.
4. Excellent hand washing techniques, using chlorhexidine detergent
   and good drying of hands.
5. Use of gloves and isolation of patients with infections due to multiple
   antibiotic-resistant strains.
802. Bubus form is which stage of LGV:
 a) Prmary

 b) Secondary

 c) Tertiary

 d) Latent



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is. 'b' i. e., Secondary
803. Nosocomial infection is most commonly
     caused by:
     March 2004
 a) Gram negative bacilli

 b) Gram positive bacilli

 c) Gram negative cocci

 d) Mycoplasma



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A i.e. Gram negative bacilli
804. ABO non- secretors are more prone to ?
 a) Infection

 b) Autoimmunity

 c) Heart disease

 d) Carcinoma



Correct Answer - A:B:C
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Infection, 'b' i.e., Autoimmunity & 'c' i.e.,Heart
disease [Ref www.dadamo.com]
There are two types of people (independent of blood group)
Secretor: These persons secrete their blood group antigen into other
body fluids like saliva etc.
Nonseretor: They do not secrete their blood group antigen into body
fluids.
Non-secretors appear to have an increase in prevalence of a variety
of autoimmune disease like ankylosing spondylitis, reactive arthritis,
Graves disease and Sjogren's syndrome.
Non - secretors are at a greater risk of developing diabetes, MI and
heart disease.
Non-secretors are at a greater risk for recurrent urinary tract
infections and candida infection.
Non-secretors have more oral diseases and more digestive
problems.
805. In Rideal walker method, plates are
     incubated for ?
 a) < 2 days

 b) 2-3 days

 c) 6-8 days

 d) > 10 days



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., 2-3 days [Ref Textbook of sterilization e.7
disinfection p.233]
In Rideal walker method, for checking efficiency of disinfectant,
bactericidal activity is determined against salmonella typhi
suspension.
Subcultures are performed from both the test and phenol at intervals
of 2.5, 5, 7.5 and 10 minutes.
The plates are incubated for 48-72 hours at 37°C.
806. CD3 is a marker for?
 a) B - cells

 b) T - cells

 c) NK - cells

 d) Monocytes



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., T - cells [Ref : Robbin's 9th/e p. 590 & 8`5/e p. 600
table (13.5)]
CD-3 is known as Pan T-cell marker.
807. Common variable deficiency is due to -
 a) Absent B cells

 b) Reduced number of B cells

 c) Defective B cell differentiation

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Defective B cell differentiation [Ref: Robbin's
9m/e p. 241 & 8th/e p. 233]
Most patients with common variable immunodeficiency have normal
or near-normal numbers of B cells in the blood and lymphoid tissues.
These B cells, however, are not able to differentiate into plasma
cells.
The clinical manifestations are caused by antibody deficiency.
The feature common to all patients is hypogammaglobulinemia,
generally affecting all the antibody classes but sometimes only IgG.
   808. Performance of components of PQLI is
        counted between
    a) -1 to +1

    b) 0 to 1

    c) 0 to 100

    d) None



   Correct Answer - C
   Ans. is 'c' i.e., 0 to 100
   The subjective component of well being-4 Quality of life
   While "level of living" is an objective component, "quality of life"
   comprises the individual's own subjective evaluation.
   The index for quality of life is "Physical quality of life index (PQLI)".
   The PQLI is an attempt to measure the quality of life or well-being of
   a country.
   Physical quality of life index consolidates three indicators:?
1. Literacy rate
2. Infant mortality rate
3. Life expectancy at age 1 year (LE)
   PQLI ranges from 0 to 100.
   For each component, the performance of individual countries is
   placed on a scale of 0 to 100, where 0 represents an absolutely
   defined worst performance and 100 represents an absolutely
   defined best performance.
   The composite index is calculated by averaging the three indicators,
   giving equal weight to each of them.
   The resulting PQLI thus also is scaled 0 to 100.
   809. Human development index includes all
        except ?
    a) Longevity

    b) Knowledge

    c) Income

    d) Literacy rate



     Correct Answer - D
     Ans. is 'd' i.e., Literacy rate
     Human development index
     HDI is a composite index combining indicators representing three
     dimensions.
  i. Longevity : Life expectancy at birth.
 ii. Knowledge : Mean years of schooling (gross enrolment ratio) and
     expected year of schooling. (In older editions of Park, i.e., 21st/e and
     older than that, it was adult literacy rate instead of expected year
     schooling).
iii. Income : GNI Per Capita (In older editions of Park, it was GDP per
     capita instead of GNI per capita).
810. Human, animal, fomite or objects from
     which infective organism enters the host
     is called ?
 a) Source

 b) Reservoir

 c) Carrier

 d) None



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Source [Ref: Park 23rdle p.92-97]
Source is 'the person, animal, object or substance from which
infectious agent passes to host', i.e. man acquires infection from
source.
Reservoir is 'any person, animal, insect, plant, soil or substance in
which an infectious agent lives and multiplies'. Infectious agent is
dependent on reservoir for survival. From reservoir it can be
transmitted to susceptible host. Thus a reservoir may act as a
source of infection when a person acquires infection directly from a
reservoir.
811. Reservoir is defined as ?
 a) Person, animal or object from which infectious agent is
    transmitted to host

 b) Person, animal or substance in which infectious agent lives and
    multiplies

 c) Person or animal in which infectious agent causes a disease

 d) None of the above



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Person, animal or substance in which infectious
agent lives and multiplies.
812. Measles is infective for:
     March 2009
 a) One day before and 4 days after rash

 b) Four days before and five days after rash

 c) Entire incubation period

 d) Only during scabs falling



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B: Four days before and five days after rash
Measles/English Measles is spread through respiration (contact with
fluids from an infected person's nose and mouth, either directly or
through aerosol transmission), and is highly contagious — 90% of
people without immunity sharing a house with an infected person will
catch it.
The infection has an average incubation period of 14 days (range 6-
19 days) and Period of communicability in measles is approximately
4 days before and 5 days after the appearance of the rash.
Measles is an infection of the respiratory system caused by a virus,
specifically a paramyxovirus of the genus Morbillivirus.
Morbilliviruses, like other paramyxoviruses, are enveloped, single-
stranded, negative-sense RNA viruses. Symptoms include fever,
cough, runny nose, red eyes and a generalized, maculopapular,
erythematous rash.
   813. Not included in Bradford Hill's criteria ?
    a) Strength of association

    b) Consistency of association

    c) Specificity of association

    d) Lack of temporal association



   Correct Answer - D
   Ans. is 'd' i.e., Lack of temporal association [Ref Park 23"/e p.
   88-89]
   It is the presence of temporal association (not lack or absence) that
   forms a criteria for causal relationship.
   Criteria that suggest causal relationship (Bradford Hill's
   criteria)
   Likehood of a causal relationship is increased by the presence of the
   following criteria :?
1. Temporal association
2. Strength of association
3. Specificity of association
4. Consistency of association
5. Biological plausibility
6. Coherence of association
   Hill's criteria (sometimes also known as 'Surgeon general's Criteria'
   of causal association): in epidemiology are Analogous to Koch's
   Postulates (of causal association between a microbe and disease) in
   microbiology.
814. Most important criterian in causal
     relationship hypothesis ?
 a) Temporal association

 b) Coherence of association

 c) Specificity of association

 d) Strength of association



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Temporal association [Ref Park 23rd/e p.89]
Most important criteria → temporal association
Weakest and most difficult criteria to establish → specificity of
association
815.           The weakest criterian in causal
                 relatianship hypothesis?
 a) Temporal association

 b) Coherence of association

 c) Specificity of association

 d) Strength of association



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Specificity of association
816. Benefit of screening is ?
 a) Prevention of disease/cancer

 b) Early treatment of disease

 c) Provide rehabilitation

 d) Diagnosing all the missing cases



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Early treatment of disease
Screening is the active search for the disease among apparently
healthy people.
Screening intends to identify healthy person those likely to have a
disease or at increased risk of a disease
understudy, thus enabling earlier intervention and management in
the hope to reduce mortality and suffering from a disease.
Screening is a type of secondary prevention → Early diagnosis,
treatment
817. Multiphasic screening means-
 a) Application of the two or more screening tests in combination at
    one time

 b) Application of two or more screening tests in combination at
    different time

 c) Application of two or more screening tests in combination at
    different geographical areas

 d) Application of separate screening tests for different diseases



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'A' i.e., Application of the two or more screening tests in
combination at one time
 Multiphasic screening
It has defined the application of two or more screening tests in
combination with a large number of people at one time than to carry
out separate screening tests for a single disease.
It increases the cost of health services without any observable
benefit.Example-Annual Health Checkups
High-risk or selective screening is done on high-risk groups
example- MRI screening of breast done annually in 25-year old
women with BRCA 1, BRCA 2 mutations in first-degree relative
818. Randomization is done to reduce ?
 a) Recall bias

 b) Selection bias

 c) Berksonian bias

 d) Reporting bias



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Selection bias
819. Benefit of RCT ?
 a) Faster study

 b) Cheaper study

 c) No selection bias

 d) Suitable for rare disease



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., No selection bias [Ref Park 23rdle p.81-83]
Randomization is the heart of RCT. Randomization is a statistical
procedure by which the participants are allocated into study group
(in which intervention is given) and control group/reference group (in
which intervention is not given).
It is worth noting that randomisation is done while dividing the
participants into study group and control (reference) group, and not
while selecting subjects for study, i.e. randomization is done after
the sample of subjects has already been selected. Therefor, each
participant has 'equal and known chance' of falling into either study
group or control group.
Randomization is an attempt to eliminate bias and allow
comparability. It will give the greatest confidence that the groups are
comparable so that "like" can be compared with "like". It ensures
that the investigator has no control over allocation of participants to
either study or control group, thus eliminating what is known as
selection bias.
820. Most commonly used blinding technique
     in epidemiological studies ?
 a) Single blinding

 b) Double blinding

 c) Triple blinding

 d) None of the above



Correct Answer - B:C
Ans. is 'b > c' i.e., Double blinding > Triple blinding [Ref
Statistics and epidemiology 3'/e p.46]
Most commonly used blinding is double blinding, i.e. most of the
epidemiological studies are started as double blinded. But more
aften than not it becomes triple blinded as more than two people in
the study are blinded → for example the statician (analyzer)
performing the analysis is often blinded in addition to doctor
(investigator) and patient (study subject).
821. Most effective blinding technique ?
 a) Single blinding

 b) Double blinding

 c) Triple blinding

 d) Any of the above



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Triple blinding [Ref Read below]
Most commonly use blinding → Double blinding
Best blinding technique to eliminate bias → Triple blinding
   822. Which of one of the following is NOT a
                   utilization rate?
    a) Population bed ratio

    b) Bed occupancy rate

    c) Bed turnover ratio

    d) Average length of stay



   Correct Answer - A
   Ans. is 'a' i.e., Population bed ratio [Ref Park 23rd/e p. 26 & 22"d/e
   p. 25]
1. Proportion of infants who are "fully immunized" against the 6 EPI
   diseases.
2. Proportion of pregnant women who receive antenatal care, or have
   their deliveries supervised by a trained birth attendant.
3. Percentage of population using various methods of family planning.
4. Bed - occupancy rate
5. Average length of stay
6. Bed turn-over ratio (i.e. discharges / average
823. Calculate IMR if in a population of 100000
     there are 3000 live births in a year and
     150 infant deaths in the same year -
 a) 75

 b) 18

 c) 5

 d) 50



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is `d' i.e., 50
824. True about combined prospective-
     retrospective study true is ?
 a) Exposure (+) nt, disease (+) nt

 b) Exposure (+) nt, disease (-) nt

 c) Exposure (-) nt, disease (+) nt

 d) Exposure (-) nt, disease (-) nt



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Exposure (+) nt, disease (+) nt [Ref Park 23"'/e p.
79-85]
There are following types of cohort study:?
A) Prospective cohort study
Outcome has not yet occurred when the study has begun: Only
exposure has occurred; we look for development of same disease in
both exposed and non-exposed groups
B) Retrospective cohort study
Both exposure as well as outcome have occurred when the study
has begun: First we go back in time and take only exposure into
consideration (cohorts identified from past hospital/ college records),
then look for development of same disease in both exposed and
non-exposed groups
C) Combined prospective-retrospective cohort study
Both exposure as well as outcome have occurred when the study
has begun: First we go back in time and take only exposure into
consideration (cohorts identified from past hospital/ college records),
then look for development of same disease in both exposed and
non-exposed groups; later cohort is followed prospectively into
future for outcome.
825. Proportional mortality rate is ?
 a) Number of death due to a particular cause

 b) Number of death during that year

 c) Number of death in one month

 d) None



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Number of death due to a particular cause
Proportional mortality rate (ratio)
Proportional mortality rate measures the proportion of total death
due to specific cause or proportion of deaths in a particular age
group.
It is defined as "number of deaths due to a particular cause (or in
specific age group) per 100 total deaths".
It is the 'simplest measure of estimating the burden of disears' in the
community.
It is a useful 'health Status indicator'; indicates magnitude of
preventable mortality.
It is used when population data is not available.
It does not indicate the risk of members of population contracting or
dying from the disease.
826. Population attributable risk is defined as
     the difference between:
 a) Incidence in exposed and incidence in non-exposed compared
    with incidence in non-exposed

 b) Incidence in population and incidence in exposed compared
    with incidence in population

 c) Incidence in population and incidence in non-exposed
    compared with incidence in population

 d) Incidence in population and incidence in exposed compared
    with incidence in non-exposed



Correct Answer - C
Ans. c. Incidence in population and incidence in non-exposed
compared with incidence in population
population attributable risk is defined as the difference between
incidence in population and incidence in non-exposed compared
with incidence in population.
827. Slection bias occurs during ?
 a) Recruitment

 b) Treatment

 c) Analysis

 d) Observation



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Recruitment [Ref: Essentials of epidemiology in
Public Health p.270]
Selection biases are distortion that result from procedure used to
select subjects and from factors that influence study participation.
Groups to be compared are differentially susceptible to the outcome
even before the experimental maneuver is performed.
Selection bias usually occurs at the Stage of recruitment of
participants.
Selection biases is less likely to occur in a cohort study compared to
case-control or cross-sectional study because study participant are
selected before the outcome occurs.
Randomized control trials do not have selection bias as
randomization eliminates selection (investigator) bias.
828. Selection bias occurs mainly in
 a) Cohort study

 b) Case-control study

 c) RCT

 d) All have equal chances



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Case-control study
Case-control study > cross-sectional study > Retrospective cohort
study > Prospective cohort study > RCT
Selection bias: Cases and controls may not be representative of the
population or there may be systematic differences between both.
829. Best study technique to study the
     occurence of rare adverse effects of drug
     ?
 a) Case-control study

 b) Cohort study

 c) Clinical trial/experimental study

 d) Cross-sectional study



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Clinical trial/experimental study [Ref Clinical
Research for medicine 2009/e p.62]
Experimental epidemiology is also called trial. Broadly speaking, a
trial refers to putting something to a test. This allows the term to be
used in reference to a test of a treatment for the sick or a test of a
preventive measure intended to avert illness, injury or disease.
Therefore, the defining feature of an experimental study is its ability
to allocate or assign interventions or treatment to experiment unit.
In simple words, the study of a treatment (Drugs, surgical
intervention) or preventive measure (e.g. vaccination) on living
subjects is known as experimental study or trial.
830. Bladder cancer can occur in those who
     are working in chimney for 25 years.
     Which is the best study for this
     relationship ?
 a) Meta-analysis

 b) Cross-sectional study

 c) Randomized control trial with double blinding

 d) Cohort study



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Meta-analysis
As a single study unit, double blind RCT is the best:
"The efficacy of new interventions are most readily accepted if the
results are from randomized controled trial"
Peer Review & Biomedical publication
However, overall meta-analysis is a better study since it combines
the data from multiple RCT and also from other types of study.
"Randomized controlled trials (RCT) provide the stongest, most
relevant evidence to inform practice. Some evidence hierarchies
place systematic review and meta-analysis above RCTs since these
often combine data from multiple RCTs, and possibly from other
study type as well" – Epidemiology at a glance
So, systematic review and meta-analysis of RCTs are the best
epidemiological studies.
831. Which is an example of case control
     study ?
 a) Thalidomide and teratogenicity

 b) Framingham heart study

 c) PVC and angiosarcoma of liver

 d) Doll & Hill Study



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Thalidomide and teratogenicity [Ref: Park
23rd /e p. 74, 75]
832. Advantage of case-control over a cohort
     study ?
 a) Attributable risk can be calculated

 b) Odd's ratio can be calculated

 c) For rare disease

 d) b and c



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Odd's ratio can be calculated & c i.e., For rare disease
o A cohort study is more reliable than a case-control study for an
association between a suspected risk factor and subsequent
disease because relative risk can be estimated by cohort study,
while case-control study measures only an estimate of relative risk
(odds ratio).
Why the Case-Control Study is suitable for a rare disease but not
Cohort Study?
o In the cohort study, we proceed from effect to cause and if the
study is for the rare disease we may get very few cases or no case
at the end of the study. For example, if a rare disease has an
incidence rate. 01 per 1000 (1 per 100000) population and we take a
sample of 100 people to expose the risk factor, there will be very few
cases at the end of the study as the disease is very rare and has a
low incidence of 1 per 100000 population. (you can expect, How low
will be the incidence in a sample of 100 people).
o On the other hand, in the case-control study, we can choose
controls for the few available cases and the history of
possible/suspected exposure (s) can be explored.
833. Immunity starts after how many days of
     yellow fever vaccination ?
 a) 7-10 days

 b) 2-3 weeks

 c) 4-5 weeks

 d) 2-3 months



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., 7-10 days [Ref Park 23rd /e p. 283]
Yellow fever vaccine
It is a live attenuated freez dried (lyophilized) vaccine, prepared from
17 D strain.
It is given by subcutaneous route at insertion of deltoid.
Immunity lasts from 7 days of vaccination till 35 years. The validity of
the vaccination certificate begins 10 days after the date of
vaccination and extends upto 10 years.
Diluent used for reconstitution is cold physiological saline and
reconstituted vaccine should be used within 30 minutes. Cold chain
temperature for storage is -30° to +5°C.
Yellow fever vaccine is the only live vaccine that can be given in
pregnancy, if required. Yellow fever and cholera vaccine cannot be
given together, a minimum gap of 3 weeks is required between the
two.
834. Which Dipheria vaccine is recommended
     in a 14 years old girl ?
 a) DPT

 b) DT

 c) Tdap

 d) None



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Tdap [Ref: www.tapcoi.com]
According to IAP (Indian Academy of Paediatricians) Tdap is
recommended for adolescents (10-18 years). (Note Tdap contains a
lower concentration of diphtheria and pertusis toxoids than DtaP)
Note:
DPT → Diphtheria, Cellular pertussis, Tetanu, used before 7 years
DtaP → Diphtheria, Tetanus, acellular pertussis
Tdap → Tetanus, diphtheria (low dose), acellular pertussis (low
dose) -> used in adolescents.
   835. Droplet nuclei is a type of ?
    a) Vertical transmission

    b) Direct transmission

    c) Indirect transmission

    d) Biological transmission



   Correct Answer - B
   Ans. is 'b' i.e., Direct transmission [Ref Park 23"1/e p.97-100, 768]
   Communicable disease may be transmitted from the reservoir or
   source of infection to a susceptible host in many different ways.
   Modes of transmission may be :?
1. Direct transmission : Direct contact, droplet infection, contact with
   soil, inoculation into skin or mucosa, vertical transmission (through
   placenta).
2. Indirect transmission : Vehicle-borne, vector-borne, air-borne,
   fomite-borne, by uncleaned hand & fingers.
836. Which is not a direct transmission ?
 a) Droplet infection

 b) Vertical transmission

 c) Transmission by mosquito

 d) Soil contact



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Transmission by mosquito
837. After taking MMR live vaccine,
     conception should not occur within ?
 a) 2 weeks

 b) 4 weeks

 c) 8 weeks

 d) 10 weeks



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., 4 weeks [Ref CDC guidlines of vaccination in
pregnancy]
Measles-mumps-rubella (MMR) vaccine and its component vaccines
should not be administered to women known to be pregnant.
Because a risk to be fetus from administration of these live virus
vaccines cannot be excluded for theoretical reasons, women should
be counseled to avoid becoming pregnant for 28 days after
vaccination with MMR vaccine or its component vaccines or varicella
vaccine.
838. Disinfection of urine is which type of
     disinfection ?
 a) Precurrent

 b) Concurrent

 c) Preconcurrent

 d) Terminal



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Concurrent [Ref Park 23"1/e p.127]
Types of disinfection
There are following types of disinfection :?
1) Precurrent (prophylactic) disinfection
It is done as a preventive method before illness, i.e. person is not ill,
for example chlorination of water, pasteurization of milk, and
handwashing.
2) Concurrent disinfection
It is done when person is ill. It is the application of disinfective
measures as soon as possible after the discharge of infectious
material from the body of patient or after the soiling of articles with
such material, i.e., the disease agent is destroyed as soon as it is
released from the body, and in this way further spread of the agent
is stopped. e.g., disinfection of urine, faeces, vomit, contaminated
linen, clothes, hands, dressing, aprons, gloves etc.
3) Terminal disinfection
It is the application of disinfective measures after the patient has
taken discharge from hospital or he/she has died. e.g., disinfection
of hospital rooms & floor, burning or burial of soiled material.
839. Not a freeze dried vaccine ?
 a) OPV

 b) Measles

 c) DPT

 d) Rubella



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., DPT [Ref: Park 23"/e p. 109 & 22"d/e p. 104]
Vaccine which must be stored in the cold part but never allowed to
freez.
TyphoidDPT TT
                       Hepatitis B
DT       BCGDiluents
840. Most widely used vaccine, beside OPV ?
 a) BCG

 b) TT

 c) Influenza

 d) Pneumococcal



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., BCG [Ref www.ncbi.nlm.mih.]
"Making wider use of the world's most widely used vaccine : Bacille
calmette-Guerine revaccination reconsidered"
"The bacille calmette-Guerin (BCG) vaccine has existed for 80 years
and is one of the most widely used of all current vaccines, reading >
80% of neonates and infants in counteries where it is part of the
national childhood immunization programme
841. True about chicken pox ?
 a) Caused by Herpes simplex type-7

 b) SAR is 90%

 c) Infectious perios is 7 days prior to 7 days after onset of rash

 d) Affects commonly 10-15 years old



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., SAR is 90% [Ref Park 23"/e p.144]
The causative agent of chicken pox is Varicella - Zoster virus
(Herpes simplex type III).
It is an acute respiratory infection with incubation period 10-21 days.
Infection is acquired through respiratory tract via air droplets or
rarely from conjunctiva.
Infectious period (communicable period) for chicken pox is 2
days prior to 5 days after onset of rash, with a very high
secondary attack rate of 90%.
Chicken-pox usually affects children of age group 5-9 years.
842. Chickenpox rash does not involve ?
 a) Trunk

 b) Axilla

 c) Palms & soles

 d) Back



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Palms & soles [Ref Park 23'/e p.144]
Rash of chicken pox : Superficial, unilocular, centripetal,
pleomorphic, symmetrical, affects flexor surfaces and axilla, spares
palms and sales, has inflammation around, rapid evolution and dew-
drop on rose petal appearnace.
843. 95% carrier and 5% cases are seen in ?
 a) Measles

 b) Diphtheria

 c) Rabies

 d) Hepatitis B



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Diphtheria [Ref: Park 23rd/e p.160]
Diphtheria is caused by Corynebacterium diphtheriae, a gram-
positive bacterium.
Source of infection is either case or carrier, with carriers being the
most common sources of infection, their ratio is estimated to
be 95 carriers for 5 clinical cases. Nasal carriers are more
dangerous than throat carriers. Inmunuzation does not prevent
carrier state.
  844. Following is Hib conjugate vaccine ?
    a) Capsular polysaccharide

    b) Cell wall polysaccheride

    c) Capsular polysaccheride with carrier

    d) PRP with carrier



   Correct Answer - C:D
   Ans. is 'd > c' i.e., PRP with carrier > Capsular polysaccheride
   with carrier [Ref Pariza 4th/e p.3401
   Conjugated Hib vaccine include PRP (polyribosyl
   ribitol phasphate) covalently linked to carrier protein. PRP is the
   Capsular polysaccaride of H influenzae type B (Hib).
   Currently three types of Hib (H influenzae type B) vaccines are
   available. These vary in ?
1. Protein carrier used
2. The molecular size of saccharide
3. Mehtod of conjugation of protein to saccharide
   These vaccines are -
1. HbOC (mutant diphtheria toxin as the carrier protein)
2. PRP-T (Tetanus toxoid as the carrier protein)
3. PRP-OMP (major OMP of N meningitidis serogroup B as carrier)
845. True about Pertussis is ?
 a) Most of the infections are subclinical

 b) Most infective stage is Paroxysmal stage

 c) Drug of choice is Erythromycin

 d) Cerebellar ataxia may be a complication



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Drug of choice is Erythromycin [Ref Park 23'/e
p.161]
Pertussis (Whooping cough)
Pertussis, also called '100 day cough', is caused by Bordetella
pertussis (only 5% cases are caused by B. parapertussis).
Source of infection is a case of pertussis. There is no subclinical
case or chronic carrier state.
Period of infectivity (communicability) extends from a week after
exposuse to about 3 weeks after the onset of paroxysmal
stage. Catarrhal stage is most infective. Secondary attack rate
is high, i.e. 90%.
For diagnosis, gold standard is isolation of organism in culture from
nasopharyngeal secretion.
Erythromycin is the drug of choice for treatment of cases as
well as for contacts. Isolation period is 4 weeks or until
paroxysms cease.
846. True about influenza infectivity ?
 a) Communicable period is 5 days before to 5 days after the onset
    of symptoms

 b) Source of infection is clinical case

 c) There are no subclinical cases

 d) All are correct



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Source of infection is clinical case [Ref Park
23rdie p.154]
Influenza
Influenza virus a RNA virus, belongs to orthomyxovirus.
Source of infection of influenza is a clinical case or subclinical case.
Major reservoir of influenza virus exists in animal and birds.
Incubation period is 18-72 hours. Most of the infections are
subclinical. Clinical cases present with cough, fever, myalgia and
headache.
Complications include pneumonia, encephalitis, Reye's syndrome
(with type-B virus); GB syndrome and gastric flu/GIT symptoms (with
type-B virus).
Period of Communicability is 1-2 days before to 1-2 days after onset
of symptoms.
847. What is common in H5N1 and H7N7
     strains of influenza ?
 a) Frequent endemic infection in man

 b) Have same frequency of antigenic variation

 c) Strains of avian influenza

 d) All are correct



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Strains of avian influenza [Ref Essentials of
microbiology p.701; Harrison 18th/e p.1494; Park 23rd/e p.153]
Avian influenza (Bird flu)
It is caused mostly by H5 N, strain of influenza - A. It was detected in
Hongkong in 1997 during a pandemic in poultry. It is a pandemic
with high mortality rate (60%).
Other types of influenza viruses which have been observed to cause
avian influenza are H7 N7 and H9 N2 of influenza - A.
Recently an outbreak of avian influenza was caused by 112 INT, in
China, in 2013.
Drug of choice for avian influenza is oseltamivir.
   848. Not used for treatment and/or
        prophylaxis of seasonal influenza -
    a) Amantidine

    b) Rimantidine

    c) Oseltamivir

    d) Acyclovir



   Correct Answer - D
   Ans. is 'd' i.e., Acyclovir
   Two classes of antiviral drugs are available for the treatment and
   prevention of influenza.
1. Neuraminidase inhibitors : Zanamivir, Oseltamivir, peramivir
2. Adamantanes : Amantidine, rimantidine
849. Capsular polysaccharide derived vaccine
     is available for all meningocci except ?
 a) Group A

 b) Group B

 c) Group C

 d) Group Y



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Group B [Ref Park 23rdie p. 166]
Meningococcal vaccine is prepared from Capsular polysaccharide.
Vaccines are availabe for group A, C, Y and W-135. Bivalent (A, C),
trivalent (A, C, W135) and tetravalent (A, C, Y, W135) vaccines are
available.
Meningoccal group B vaccine was not available for last two
decades. Recently, group B vaccine has also been developed in
many countries (UK, Ireland) and is a part of routine immunization
schedule.
Now, you must be thinking that why the answer of this question is
group B meningococci. This is because meningococcal vaccine is
not prepared from capsular polysaccharide.
850. Vaccine derived polio virus outbreaks
     are due to ?
 a) Type-2 virus

 b) Type-3 virus

 c) Type-1 virus

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Type-2 virus
"The main cause of vaccine derived poliovirus (VDPV) out breaks is
currently type-2 component of OPV" ...Park 23rd/e
"Currently, the type-2 component contained in trivalent OPV
accounts for more than 90% of all CVDPV cases" .
851. False regarding polio vaccination ?
 a) Both killed and live vaccines are available

 b) First OPV is given at 4 weeks

 c) OPV induces both humoral and intestinal immunity

 d) IPV is given intramuscularly



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., First OPV is given at 4 weeks [Ref Park 23rd/e
p.206-210]
First OPV (zero dose) is given at birth.
There are two polio vaccines : killed (IPV) and live attenuated (OPV)
OPV induces both humoral and intestinal immunity, whereas IPV
induces only humoral immunity.
IPV is given intramuscularly (preferrable) or subcutaneously.
852. Reservoir of infection in enteric fever ?
 a) Birds

 b) Cow

 c) Cattle

 d) Man



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Man [Ref Park 23rdle p.235]
Typhoid fever is the result of systemic infection mainly by S.typhi
found only in man. The term enteric fever include both typhoid fever
(caused by S. typhi) and paratyphoid fever (caused by S. Paratyphi
& 'C').
Reservoir - Man is the only reservoir. Carriers are more important
than cases.
Source of infection
Primary Feces, Urine
Secondary - Water, food, fingers, flies.
853. Rideal-walker coefficient for disinfectant
     used for cholera stool should be ?
 a) 2

 b) 4

 c) 7

 d) 10



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., 10 [Ref Park 23'1/4 p. 129-30 & 22"/e p. 120]
For cholera stool : ?
"The most effective disinfectant for general use is a coal-tar
disinfectant with a Rideal-Walker (RW) coefficient of 10 or more
such as cresol". - Park 250
854. Women traveling from Bihar to Delhi is
     suspecting to have Kala-azar. Suitable
     investigation is ?
 a) P24 antigen

 b) Rk-39 test

 c) Combo RDT

 d) HRP-2 antigen



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., rk-39 test [Ref Park 23rd le p.305, 306; Essentials of
microbiology p.785]
Laboratory diagnosis of Kala-azar
The demonstration of parasite LD bodies in the aspirates of the
spleen, liver, bone marrow or lymph node is only way to confirm
visceral leishmaniasis.
Hematological findings : T ESR, anaemia, reversed albumin-globulin
ratio & leucopenia.
Aldehyde test of Napier is a simple test widely used in India for the
diagnosis of Kala-azar.
Serological test : Direct agglutination test, rk 39 dipstick test, ELISA
& Indirect fluorescent antibody test.
Leishmanin test : This test is based on skin reaction.
855. Most common route of nosocomial
     infection [Hospital-acquired infection] ?
 a) Droplet transmission

 b) Direct contact

 c) Indirect contact

 d) Vehicle transmission



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is `B' i.e., Direct contact [Ref Textbook of Environmental
microbiology p.819]
There are following types of modes of transmission of hospital-
acquired infections.
Contact transmission
It is the most common and most preventable means of transmission.
It is divided into two types -
Direct contact : It involves contact of body surface to body surface
with a physical transfer of microorganisms. Hand contact is most
common mode of transmission.
Indirect contact : It involves body surface contact with a
contaminated intermediate object.
   856. Behavioral surveillance survey is done in
        ?
    a) Malaria

    b) Filaria

    c) AIDS

    d) TB



   Correct Answer - C
   Ans. is 'c' i.e.,AIDS [Ref www.cdc.gov/hiv]
   Behavioral surveillance survey is done in persons who are at high
   risk for HIV infection.
   Surveillance is conducted in rotating, annual cycles in three different
   populations at increased risk for HIV :?
1. Gay, bisexual and other men who have sex with men (MSM cycle).
2. Persons who inject drugs (IDU cycle).
3. Heterosexuals at increased risk for HIV infection (HET cycle).
857. Drug of choice for Mass therapy under
     filaria control Programme ?
 a) Albendazole

 b) Ivermectin

 c) DEC

 d) Mebendazole



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e.,DEC [Ref nvbdcp.gov.in]
Every person above 2 years of age living in the endemic area
(except for pregnent women & seriously ill person) should be given
Diethylcarbamazine citrate (DEC) tablets.
0-2 years N.1.
t.,2-5 years 1 tablet of 100 mg
6-14 years 2 tablets of 100 mg
15 years 3 tablets of 100 mg
  858. Which of the following larvicide is used
       under urban Malaria Scheme ?
    a) Malathion

    b) Parathion

    c) DDT

    d) Abate



   Correct Answer - D
   Ans. is 'd' i.e., Abate [Ref nvbdcp.gov.in]
   Following chemical larvicides are used in the Urban Malaria Scheme
   Programme
1. Temephos (Abate)
2. Bti (WP ey, 12AS) Bacillus thuringiensis israelensis.
859. Regular insectisidal spray is done when
     API is ?
 a) > 1

 b) > 2

 c) < 1

 d) < 2



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., > 2 [Ref: Park 20 le p.384]
Area with API <2→ focal spaying
Area with API >2 → regular spray
Areas having Annual Parasite Index (API) > 2
Regular 2 rounds of insecticidal spray with DDT/Malathion/Synthetic
Pyrethroids at the dose of 1, 2, 0.5 mg/sq meter respectively.
Entomological assessment for vector behavior and development of
insecticidal resistance
Active and passive surveillance is carried outon regular basis every
fortnight.
Presumptive Treatment to all fever cases and radical treatment to all
slide positive cases is given
860. Main function of sodium citrate in ORS ?
 a) To increase absorption of glucose by cotransport

 b) To correct electrolyte imbalance

 c) To correct Acidosis

 d) To correct dehydration



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., To correct Acidosis
The main function of sodium citrate is to correct acidosis ?
"The citrate in ORS is needed for the treatment of acidosis, which
frequently occurs with dehydration" "Efficacy of sodium citrate
equals to sodium bicarbonate for correction of acidosis in diarrhea"
861. For post exposure prophylaxis for HIV
     the regimen is ?
 a) Zidovodin + lamivudin for 4 weeks

 b) Lamivudin + ritonavir for 4 weeks

 c) Zidovudin + lamivudin + Indinavir for 4 weeks

 d) Single dose zidovudin + lamivudin + Indinavir



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Zidovudin + lamivudin + Indinavir for 4 weeks
Postexposure prophylaxis
Anti-retroviral drug for post-exposure prophylaxis should be initiated
as soon as possible after the exposure within the first few hours and
no later than 72 hours.
Usually combination of two nucleoside reverse transcriptase
inhibitors (zidovudin and lamivudin) plus a protease inhibitor
(ritonavir or indinavir) is given for 4 weeks.
To provent mother to child transmission, the preferred regimen is
single dose of nevirapine to mother at onset of labour and to child
within 72 hours of birth. Zidovudine is also used, but requires
multiple dosage. Caesarean section reduces the risk of transmission
by 50%.
862. True about post-exposure prophylaxis in
     HIV ?
 a) Should be given in 5 days of exposure

 b) Single dose nevirapine prevents mother to child transmission

 c) Given for 2 weeks

 d) Standard protocol is to use Any Two NRTIs with no other drugs



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Single dose nevirapine prevents mother to child
transmission [Ref Has been explained]
863. Incubation period of plasmodium vivax
     is-
 a) 5-7 days

 b) 7-10 days

 c) 10-14 days

 d) 15-30 days



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., 10-14 days
864. Drug of choice for plasmodium vivax is:
     September 2006
 a) Mefloquine

 b) Chloroquine

 c) Artesunate

 d) Quinine



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B: Chloroquine
Chloroquine remains the treatment of choice for clinical cure and
suppressive prophylaxis of all types of malaria, except that caused
by resistant P.falciparum.
In short time visitors to chloroquine-sensitive endemic areas,
suppressive dose should be started 1 week before and continued for
4 weeks after returning.
865. Maximum relative risk attributed by
     obesity to which condition ?
 a) Hypertension

 b) CHD

 c) DM

 d) Cancer



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., DM [Ref Obesity clinical management p.712]
"Recently, a meta-analysis of 89 studies examining the relative risk
of obesity-related co-morbidities showed that the strongest
association was with type 2 diabetes mellitus"
"Proportion of type II diabetes that is attributable to obesity was
approximately 61% whereas the proportion of CHD that wast
attributable to obesity was approximately 17%"
866. Rule of Halves is related to ?
 a) Obesity

 b) Burns

 c) Blindness

 d) Hypertension



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e.,Hypertension [Ref Park 23'/e p.376]
Rule of Halves: Hypertension is an 'Iceberg disease'. Only about half
of hypertensive subjects in general population of most of the
developed countries are aware of condition, only half of those aware
of the problem were being treated and only half of those treated
were considered adequately treated.
867. Total communication means ?
 a) Use of all methods of communication for advertisment

 b) Use of all methods of communication for school teaching

 c) Use of all methods of communication for community
    participation

 d) Using every communication option to teach deaf child



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Using every communication option to teach deaf
child [Ref Development - behavioral pediatrics p.392]
Total communication is philosophy of educating children with
hearing loss (deaf children) that incorporates all means of
communication, i.e. formal signs, natural gestures, fingerspelling,
body language, listening, lipreading and speech.
868. Newborn care corner is present in ?
 a) NICU

 b) OPD

 c) Labour room

 d) Wards side room



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Labour room [Ref dghs.gov.bd]
Newborn care corner is a space within the delivery room where
immediate care is provided to all newborns
   Health facility      All newborns at birth      Sick newborns
 MCH level I:        Newborn care corner      Prompt referral
 PHC, Subcentre (NBCC) in labour room         Newborn
 MCH level 11:       NBCC in labour room and stabilization unit
 CHC, First          operation theatre        (NBSU)
 referral unit       NBCC in labour room and Special newborn
 (FRU)               operation theatre        care unit (SNCU)
 MCH level
 District hospital
  869. Smoking is preventive for ?
   a) Lung cancer

   b) Chronic bronchitis

   c) Ulcerative colitis

   d) CHD



   Correct Answer - C
   Ans. is 'c' i.e.,Ulcerative colitis
   Smoking has been shown to have some protective effect in -
1. Ulcerative colitis
2. Parkinson's disease
3. Endometrial cancer and uterine fibroid
4. Pre-eclampsia
5. Thyroid cancer
6. Skin cancer (melanoma)
7. Psychiatric symptoms
8. Aphthous stomatitis
   870. According female sterlization 2014
        guidelines, eligibility criteria for female
        sterilization are all except?
    a) Age between 22-49 years

    b) Should have at least 1 child

    c) Unmarried woman

    d) Partner is not sterilized



   Correct Answer - C
   Ans. is 'c' i.e.,Unmarried woman [Ref www.tvhealth.org]
   Following are the eligibility criteria for female sterilization (2014) ?
1. Clients should be ever-married.
2. Female clients should be above the age of 22 years and below the
   age of 49 years.
3. The couple should have at least one child, whose age is above one
   year, unless the sterilization is medically indicated.
4. Clients or their spouses/partners must not have undergone
   sterilization in the past (not applicable in cases of failure of previous
   sterilization).
5. Clients must be in a sound state of mind, so as to understand the full
   implications of sterilization.
6. Mentally ill clients must be certified by a psychiatrist and a statement
   should be given by the legal guardian/spouse regarding the
   soundness of the client's state of mind.
7. A relevant medical history, physical examination and laboratory
   investigations need to be completed to ascertain eligibility for
   surgery.
   871. Which state has lowest IMR ?
    a) Uttar Pradesh

    b) Kerala

    c) Maharashtra

    d) Tamil Nadu



   Correct Answer - B
   Ans. is 'b' i.e., Kerala [Ref Park 23rd/e p.563-561
   Kerala has lowest -
1. Infant mortality rate
2. Neonatal mortality rate
3. Post neonatal mortality rate
4. Child mortality rate
872. Gross reproduction rate is ?
 a) Number of girls born to a mother in her reproductive age

 b) Number of boys born to a mother in her reproductive age

 c) Number of total children born to a mother in her reproductive
    age

 d) Number of lives births per 1000 women



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Number of girls born to a mother in her
reproductive age [Ref Park 23'/e p.489]
Gross reproduction rate
Average number of girls that would be born to a married woman if
she experiences the current fertility pattern throughout her
reproductive span (15-44 or 49 year) assuming no mortality.
GRR in India is 1.1 (1.2 in rural areas and 0.8 in urban areas).
873. In a town there are 2500 live birth within
     six month. During same period 5 women
     died due to peripartum infection, 5 died
     due to electrocution, 2 died due to
     obstructed labor and 3 died due to PPH.
     What is the MMR ?
 a) 4 per 1000 live birth

 b) 6 per 1000 live birth

 c) 40 per 1000 live birth

 d) 60 per 1000 live birth



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., 4 per 1000 live birth [Ref Park 23rd/e p.559]
In this question, pregnancy related deaths are 10 (infection,
obstructed labor and PPH). Electrocution is not a pregnancy/ labor
related death so excluded from numerator..
874. Vital statistics in a population are ?
 a) Sex ratio

 b) Age composition

 c) Birth rate

 d) Dependency ratio



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Birth rate
Vital statistics are statistics concerning the important events in
humon life, such as birth, death, marriages and migration. These are
-
Birth rates
Death rates
Infant mortality rate
Fertility rate
Mortalility rates (perinatal mortality rate, MMR, CMR etc)
875. What is exponential growth ?
 a) Rapid growth in population that leads to disbalance in birth and
    deaths

 b) Slow growth rate

 c) Growth limited by limiting factors

 d) None



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Rapid growth in population that leads to
dysbalance in birth and deaths [Ref O.P. Ghai 7Ve p. 93]
Exponentional Vs logistic population growth
The population growth of a species is regulated by limiting factors
(resources) that exist within the species environment.
Population growth maintains equilibrium in all species under normal
conditions bacause of these limiting factors.
A populations overall growth rate is affected by the birth
rate and death rate.
The rate of increase within a populations is represented by the birth
rate minus death rate.
When the growth rate in a population is represented by the birth rate
minus the death rate, the population remains at a constant level.
876. Sample registration system is done once
     in ?
 a) 6 months

 b) 1 year

 c) 2 years

 d) 5 years



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., 6 Months
877. In a community of 1000000 population
     105 children were born in a year out of
     which 5 was still births, and 4 died within
     6 months after birth. The IMR is ?
 a) 40

 b) 90

 c) 120

 d) 150



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., 40 [Ref: Read below]
In the given question out of 105 deliveries, 5 were still births -3 Thus,
live births are 100.
Infant deaths are 4.
878. Maternal mortality rate is defined as ?
 a) Maternal death per 1000 total births

 b) Maternal death per 1000 live births

 c) Maternal death per 1000 women

 d) Maternal death per 1000 women of reproductive age



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Maternal death per 1000 women of reproductive
age [Ref Park 23rd /e p.558-559]
Maternal mortality rate=Total no. of female death due to
complication of pregnancy childbirth or within 42 days of delivery /
Total no. of women of reproductive age x1000
879. NPU for egg is ?
a) 70

b) 80

c) 85

d) 100



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., 100
The net protein utilization, or NPU, is the ratio of amino
acid mass converted to proteins to the mass of amino acids
supplied.
NPU for egg: 100Wheat: 51       Fish: 77
NPU for meat: 80 Pulses: 45-50 Rice: 65
NPU for milk: 81 Soyabean: 55
880. Skeletal fluorosis occurs with fluoride
     level in water?
 a) < 1.5 mg/L

 b) 1.5-3 mg/L

 c) 3-6 mg/L

 d) > 10 mg/L



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'C' i.e., 3-6 mg/L
Dental fluorosis → > 1.5 mg/L (PPM)
Skeletal fluorosis → 3-6 mg/L (PPM)
Crippling fluorosis → > 10 mg/L (PPM)
  881. Mid-day meal provides ?
    a) 1/2 of energy

    b) 1/3 of protein

    c) 30 gm pulse/day

    d) All are correct



   Correct Answer - C
   Ans. is 'c' i.e., 30 gm pulse/day [Ref Park 23"Ve p.662]
   Mid-day Meal Programme
   It is also known as 'School Lunch Programme'. It was launched
   in 1961 under Ministry of Education. The features of programme
   are :
1. Meal should be a supplement and not a substitue to home diet.
2. The meal should supply at least 1/3 of total energy requirement and
   Y2 of total protein requirement.
   A model-menu of mid-day school meal is as follows :-
         A mid-day school meal
   Foodstuffs              g/day/child
   Cereals and millets 75
   Pulses                  30
   Oils and fats           8
   Leafy vegetables        30
   Non-leafy vegetables 30
882. Maximum protein is found in ?
 a) Egg

 b) Soyabean

 c) Rice

 d) Wheat



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Soyabean
883. Tablet for supplementation of iron and
     folic acid for adult contains ?
 a) 20 mg iron, 5001,tg folic aci

 b) 40 mg iron, 250     folic acid

 c) 100 mg iron, 500 lig folic acid

 d) 100 mg iron, 100 hg folic acid



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., 100 mg iron, 500 jig folic acid
884. Limiting amino acid in cereals ?
a) Methionine

b) Tryptophan

c) Lysine

d) Cysteine



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Lysine
Food      Deficiency
Cereals Lysine & threonine
Wheat Lysine & threonine
Maize Tryptophan & lysine
Pulses Methionine & cysteine
SoybeanMethionine
  885. Vanaspati Ghee is fortified with ?
    a) Iodine

    b) Vitamin A

    c) Iron

    d) Calcium



   Correct Answer - B
   Ans. is 'b' i.e., Vitamin A
   Examples of food fortification : -
1. Iodisation of Salt
2. Addition of vitamin A and D in vanaspati (2500 IU vitamin A and 175
   IU vitamin D per 100 gm).
3. Fluoridation of water.
4. Calcium added to fruit juices.
5. Folic acid added to flour.
886. Village Health and Nutrition Day (VHND)
     is observed ?
 a) Every week

 b) Every month

 c) Every 6 month

 d) Every year



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'B' i.e., Every month
The Village-Health and Nutrition day (VHND) is to be organized
once every month on a fixed day (such as the second Saturday).
The day can be decided by the VHWSC (village health and water
sanitation committee) in each village at anyone of the Anganwadi
centers (AWCs) in that village, preferably, all the AWCs should be
covered by rotation.
On that day, Anganwadi worker and other VHWSC members will
mobilize villagers to assemble in AWC.
887. Phrynoderma is due to ...deficiency-
 a) Vitamin D

 b) Niacin

 c) Vitamin A

 d) Essential fatty acid



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Essential fatty acid
In vitamin 'A' deficiency there is toad like skin also known as
phrynoderma.
o But this is due to associated deficiency of essential fatty acids.
888. Protein quality assessment is best done
     by ?
 a) NPU

 b) Biological value

 c) Digestibillity coefficient

 d) Amino acid score



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., NPU
o Net protein utilization is considered to be most practile because it
is the product of biological value and digestibility coefficient divided
by 100.
889. Nutrient which is lost maximum in
     polished rice?
 a) Proteins

 b) Thiamine

 c) Ascorbic acid

 d) Calcitriol



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Thiamine
Effect of milling on rice
The milling process deprives the rice grain of its valuable nutritive
elements
890. Glycemic index is defined as:
 a) Glucose control in last 3 months

 b) Measure of the change in the blood glucose following ingestion
    of proteins

 c) Measure of the change in the blood glucose following ingestion
    of carbohydrate

 d) Measure of the change in the blood glucose following ingestion
    of fats.



Correct Answer - C
The Glycemic index (GI) of a carbohydrate containing food is a
measure of the change in the blood glucose following its ingestion
891. Low glycemic index is classified as value less than:
 a) 25

 b) 45

 c) 55

 d) 65



Correct Answer - C
Concept of glycemic index has utility in management of diabetes and obesity.
                GI range
Classification                                       Example

                            Most fruits and vegetables except potatoes and water melon,
Low GI         55 or less
                            pasta beans, lentils
Medium GI      56-69        Sucrose, brown rice, basmati rice
               70 or
High GI                     Corn flakes, white bread, candy bar
               more


Ref: Park 22nd edition, page 568
892. Caloric requirement in an adult male for
     heavy work?
 a) 1800 k cal/d

 b) 2300 k cal/d

 c) 3000 k cal/d

 d) 3500 k cal/d



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is `d' i.e., 3500 k cal/d [Ref Park 23rd le p.634]
Indian Reference Indian Reference
Energy requirementsMan                 Woman
Light work               2320 kcal/day 1900 kcal/day
Moderate work            2730 kcal/day 2230 kcal/day
Heavy work               3490 kcal/day 2850 kcal/day
893. Differences between human milk and
     cow milk are all of the following except:
     September 2005
 a) Cow milk has comparatively more fat

 b) Cow milk has comparatively more protein

 c) Cow milk has comparatively more calcium

 d) Cow milk is iron deficient



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D: Cow milk is iron deficient
Cow milk has comparatively more energy, fat, protein, minerals, iron
and calcium Human milk has comparatively more of lactose and
vitamin C but is deficient of iron.
894. Skin fold thickness is measured in all of the following places, EXCEPT:
 a) Mid triceps

 b) Biceps

 c) Supra pubic

 d) Supra iliac



Correct Answer - C
Harpenden callipers are used to measure skin fold thickness.
Skin fold thickness is measured in mid triceps, biceps, supra iliac and sub scapular
areas.
The sum of these measurements should be less than 40 mm in boys and 50 mm in girls.

Ref: Park 21st edition, page 369.
895. Which is true of pathogenic mosquitoes
     ?
 a) Anopheles has spotted abdomen

 b) Mansoni lays eggs singly

 c) Culex cause yellow fever

 d) Aedes has stripped yellow scales



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Aedes has stripped yellow scales [Ref Park 23rdie
p. 769 & 22nd/e p. 714]
Aedes mosquitoes are easily distinguished by white stripes on a
black body. Because of the striped or banded Character of their legs
they are sometimes referred to as tiger mosquito.
Anopheles has spotted wings (not spotted abdomen).
Mansoni lays eggs in clusters.
Yellow fever is caused by aedes mosquito (not culex).
896. Which is not an aryl organophosphate ?
 a) Malathion

 b) Parathion

 c) Chlorthion

 d) Diazinon



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Malathion
Organophosphates
               Alkyl
Aryl
               Malathion
Diazinon
               Sulfotepp
Parathion
               Demeton
Chlorpyrifos
               Triclorfon
Chlorthion
               HETP
Paraoxon
               TEPP
897. True about culex larvae ?
 a) Rest parallel to surface water

 b) Long Palmate hair

 c) Siphon tube present

 d) All are true



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Siphon tube present [Ref Park 23'/e p. 769 &
22"d/e p. 714]
898. Horrock's apparatus is used to measure
     ?
 a) Wind velocity

 b) Humidity

 c) Chlorine demand

 d) Cooling power



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Chlorine demand
-Chlorine demand for water can be estimated by Horrock's
apparatus.
-Chlorine demand of water is the amount of chlorine that is needed
to destroy bacteria and to oxidize all the organic matter and
ammoniacal substances present in water.
-It is the difference between the amount of chlorine added to the
water, and the amount of residual chlorine remaining at the end of a
specific period of contact (usually 1 hr), at a given temperature and
pH of the water
899. Indicator used in Horroch's apparatus ?
 a) Bleaching powder

 b) Soda-lime

 c) Potassium permagnate

 d) Starch iodine



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Starch iodine [Ref Park 23'/e p. 717]
In Horrock's apparatus, 6 cups are filled with water and indicator
(starch iodine) is added in increasing quantity in each cup (1 unit in
lst, 2 units in 2nd, 3 units in third and so on).
The first cup which shows the blue color is multiplied by 2, for
example if 2nd cup shows blue colour than 4 grams (2 x 2) of
bleaching powder will required to disinfect 455 litre of water.
900. In water testing from a well [containing
     75000 litres of water] by Horrock's
     apparatus, there is blue colour from
     4th cup onwards. What is the amount of
     bleaching powder required to disinfect
     the water ?
 a) 1000 gm

 b) 1300 gm

 c) 1600 gm

 d) 2000 gm



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e.,1300 gm
In Horrock's apparatus, 6 cups are filled with water and indicator
(starch iodine) is added in increasing quantity in each cup (1 unit in
1st, 2 units in 2nd, 3 units in third and so on).
The first cup which shows the blue color is multiplied by 2, for
example, if the 2nd cup shows a blue colour than 4 grams (2 x 2) of
bleaching powder will be required to disinfect 455 litre of water.
Bleaching powder required=8*75000/455=1318
901. Daylight factor in the kitchen should be ?
 a) 5%

 b) 8%

 c) 10%

 d) 15%



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e.,10% [Ref Park 22"d /e p. 687, 688]
Minimum recommended day light factor :
Living room → 8%
Kitchens → 10%
902. Anemometer measures ?
 a) Humidity

 b) Air velocity

 c) Room temperature

 d) Radiant temperature



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Air velocity [Ref Park 23'/e p. 749 & 22"d/e p. 695]
903. SI unit of luminal intesity is -
 a) Candela

 b) Lumen

 c) Lux

 d) Coulomb



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Candela [Ref BASAK p.4]
Candela is the SI base unit of luminous intensity, i.e. luminous
power per unit solid angle emitted by a point light source in a
particular direction.
SI unit of luminous intensity -÷ Candela
SI unit of luminous flux -± Lumen
SI unit of illuminance -÷ Lux
904. Waste Sharps should be disposed in ?
 a) Black bag

 b) Yellow bag

 c) Blue bag

 d) None of these



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e.,Blue bag [Ref Park 23'/e p. 793-794]
905. Which category waste is disposed in red
     bags ?
 a) Category 1

 b) Category 2

 c) Category 3

 d) Category 10



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e.,Category 3 [Ref Park 23'/e p.793, 794]
906. All are incinerated except ?
 a) Human anatomical waste

 b) Animal waste

 c) Infected solid waste

 d) Broken thermometers



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e.,Broken thermometers [Ref: Park 23"1/e p. 791 &
22"/e p. 738]
"Waste types not to be incinerated are: (a) pressurized gas
container; (b) large amount of reactive chemical wastes; (c) silver
salts and photographic or radiographic wastes; (d) Halogenated
plastics such as PVC; (e) waste with high mercury or cadmium
content, such as broken thermometers, used batteries, and lead-
lined wooden panels; and (J) sealed ampules or ampules containing
heavy metals"
907. Incineration is used for which category
     of waste ?
 a) Category 1

 b) Category 7

 c) Category 4

 d) Category 10



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Category 1 [Ref Park 23`ale p.793-794]
Incineration is done for category 1,2,3 & 6
908. Micropolysopora faeni causes ?
 a) Baggasosis

 b) Farmer's lung

 c) Suberosis

 d) Sequousis



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'B' i.e., Farmer's lung
Micropolyspora faeni in Hay or grain dust causes farmer's lung.
Anthracosis
Silicosis                 Coal dust
Siderosis                 Silica
Byssinosis                Iron
Farmer's lung             Cotton dust (textile industry)
Sequousis                 Hay or grain dust (micropolyspora faeni)
Suberosis
                          Moldy red wood saw dust
Detergent worker's        Moldy cork dust
lung                      Enzyme additives
Baggassosis               Sugarcane dust (thermoactinomyces
                          sacchari)
909. In disaster management all are true
     except
 a) Mitigation before a disaster strikes

 b) Response in pre-disaster phase

 c) Yellow colour is for medium priority

 d) Gastroenteritis is commonest infection after disaster



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'B' i.e., Response in pre-disaster phase
Disaster management
Disaster Impact
Most injuries are sustained during the impact, and thus the
greatest need for emergency care occurs in the first few hours.
The management can be divided into:-
Search, rescue and first aid: Most immediate help comes from
uninjured survivors.
Field care: As many injured patients come simultaneously,
emergency services should be proper in terms of priority and
numbers of facilities.
Triage: Triage consists of classifying the injured based on the
severity of injuries and the likelihood of their survival with prompt
medical intervention. The most common triage classification system
used internationally is four colour code system:?
1. Red            High priority
    -             treatment or transfer
2. Yellow         Medium priority
    -
3. Green          Ambulatory patients
4. Black          Dead or moribund
          -       patients
Tagging: All patients should be identified with tags.
Identification of the dead: Proper respect to dead is of great
importance
910.    In disaster management following are
                   practiced except
a) Triage

b) Rehabilitation

c) Mass vaccination

d) Disaster response



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Mass vaccination
Disaster Management includes three aspects:
1. Disaster impact and response:
 Search, rescue, and first-aid
• Field care
• Triage
• Tagging
• Identification of the dead
2. Rehabilitation or recovery:
• Water supply
• Basic sanitation and personal hygiene
• Food safety
• Vector control
3. Mitigation: Measures designed either to prevent hazards from
causing disaster or to reduce the effects of the disaster. This
also includes preparedness for any impending disasters or in
disaster-prone areas.
911. True about Anganwadi worker is all
     except ?
 a) Mostly female

 b) Training for 4 months

 c) Under ICDS scheme

 d) Covers a population of 2000



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'D' i.e., Covers a population of 2000
Anganwadi center is mainly managed by Anganwadi worker.
Mostly Anganwadi worker is a female worker.
She is a health worker chosen from the community and given 4
months training in health, nutrition and childcare.
one AWC is for 400-800 population
  912. As per ICDS scheme, there should be
       one Anganwadi centre for a population
       of ?
    a) 1000-1500

    b) 2000-25000

    c) 400-800

    d) 100-200



   Correct Answer - C
   Ans. is 'c' i.e.,400-800
   The recommendations of Anganwadi center are :?
1. Rural/urban projects -› One anganwadi centere per 400-800
   population, and one mini-anganwadi center per 150-400 population.
2. Tribal/Hilly/Other difficult areas One anganwadi centre per 300-800
   population, and one mini-anganwadi centre per 150-300 population.
913. All are true for ASHA worker EXCEPT:
     March 2013
 a) Informs about birth and deaths in her village to PHC

 b) Education atleast till 4th class or higher

 c) Local resident

 d) Works per 1000 people of an area



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B i.e. Education atleast till 4th class or higher
ASHA/Accredited Social Health Activists (ASHAs)
ASHAs must primarily be female residents of the village that they
have been selected to serve, who are likely to remain in that village
for the foreseeable future.
Married, widowed or divorced women are preferred over women
who have yet to marry since Indian cultural norms dictate that upon
marriage a woman leaves her village and migrates to that of her
husband.
ASHAs must have class eight education or higher, preferably be
between the ages of 25 and 45, and are selected by and
accountable to the gram panchayat (local government).
914. True about ASHA are all except
 a) One per 1000 rural population

 b) Mobiliser of antenatal care

 c) Female voluntary worker

 d) Skilled birth attendant



Correct Answer - D
skilled birth attendant /Ref: Park 20/e, p 380-381 (19k, p 365)1
Ref. littp://molifw.nic.in/NRHM/stakeholders.htm
ASHA is the central component of the National Rural Health Mission
(NRHM)
National Rural Health Mission (NRHM) was launched to address the
health needs of rural population, especially the vulnerable sections
of society
One of the key components of the National Rural Health Mission is
to provide every village in the country with a trained female
community health activist — `ASHA' or Accredited Social Health
Activist. Selected from the villa itself and accountable to it, the ASHA
will he trained to work as an interface between the community and
the public e health system.
Following are the key components of ASHA:
ASHA must primarily be a woman resident of the village — married/
widowed/ divorced, preferably in the age group of 25 to 45 years.
She should be a literate woman with formal education up to class
eight. This may be relaxed only if no suitable person with this
qualification is available.
ASHA will be the first port of call for any health related demands of
deprived sections of the population, especially women and children,
who find it difficult to access health services
ASHA will be a health activist in the community who will create
awareness on health and its social determinantsand mobilize the
community towards local health planning and incareased utilization
and accountability of the existing health services. She would be a
promoter of good health practices.
She will counsel women on birth preparedness, importance of safe
delivery, breastfeeding and complementary feeding, immunization,
contraception and prevention of common infections including
Reproductive Tract Infection/Sexually Transmitted Infection
(RT1s/STIs) and care of the young child
The gynaecomastia causing drugs can he categorized into :
The first type are drugs that act exactly like estrogens, such as
diethylstilbestrol, birth control pills, digitalis, and estrogen containing
cosmetics.
The second type is drugs that enhance endogenous estrogen
formation such as gonadotropins and clomiphene.
The third type is drugs that inhibit testosterone synthesis and action
such as spironolactone, ketoconazole, metronidazole and
cimetidine.
The final type is drugs that act by unknown mechanisms such as
isoniazid, methyldopa, captopril, tricyclic antidepressants, diazepam
and heroin.
Also know,
Testosterone also causes Gynaecomastia
915. All of the following are duties of an
     ASHA worker except:
 a) Primary screening for prevalence of non-communica​ble
    diseases

 b) Administering zero dose of DPT and OPV

 c) Assessing the success of national programs under ANM

 d) All



Correct Answer - B
Ans: C. Administering zero dose of DPT and OPV
Ref: Park 24Ie p936, 23Ie p449, 22Ie p414; Ministry of Health anti
Family Welfare (MoHFW). (2005b). Reading Material for ASHA.
Government of India)
ASHA does'nt receive financial remuneration for administering zero
dose of DPT and OPV is not the function of ASHA.
ASHA Payments under Janani Suraksha Yojana (JSY): On 45th
Day:
6 visits in institutional deliveries (Day 3, 7, 14, 21, 28,
7 visits in home deliveries (Day 1, 3, 7, 14, 21, 28, 42).
Birth weight record
Immunized with BCG, first dose of OPV & DPT
Birth registration
Mother & child are safe
916. ASHA gets remuneration on all except ?
 a) Institutional delivery

 b) Zero dose of OPV and BCG

 c) Recording birth weight

 d) Birth registration



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Zero dose of OPV and BCG
917. Swajaldhara programme is associated with:
 a) Provision of safe drinking water

 b) Provision of food supplements for destitute women

 c) Provision of relief for victim of sexual abuse

 d) Provision of health care for sick tribals



Correct Answer - A
Swajaldhara is a community lead participatory programme, which aims at provision of safe
drinking water in rural areas with the full ownership of the community.

Swajaldhara has 2 components:

Swajaldhara I – for a Grama Panjayath or a group of Panjayath
Swajaldhara II – for a district as such

Ref: Park, Edition 21, Page - 419
918. Group of 4-8 experts talking in front of a
     large group of audience is known
     as:
     September 2011
 a) Symposium

 b) Workshop

 c) Seminar

 d) Panel discussion



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D: Panel Discussion
In a panel discussion, 4-8 persons who are qualified to talk about the
topic sit and discuss a given problem, or the topic, in front of a large
group of audience
Panel Discussion
A panel consists of a small group of four or eight persons, who carry
on a guided and informal discussion before an audience as if the
panel were meeting alone.
The proceedings of the panel should be the same as those
described for informal discussion: volunteering of facts,
asking questions, stating opinions-all expressed with geniality, with
respect for the contributions of other members, without speech
making, and without making invidious personal references.
This primary function should occupy approximately two-thirds of the
allotted time-say forty minutes of an hour's meeting.
The secondary function of the panel is to answer questions from the
audience.
This discussion method is suitable for use when a relatively large
audience is anticipated.
audience is anticipated.
The disadvantage of the method is that it confines most of the
discussion to the panel itself.
The audience listens and is given a chance to ask questions, but for
the most part is passive and receptive.
Panel discussions, if well conducted, are usually more interesting to
the audience than is the single-speaker forum.
They provide sufficiently varied clash of opinion and presentation of
facts to give even the quiet members of the audience a feeling of
vicarious participation.
Quality and tasks of leadership in panel discussion are similar to
those described for informal discussion.
The leader must in addition take special care to select panel
members who can think and speak effectively.
He must also be sure that they prepare themselves to discuss the
subject.
During the discussion by the panel the leader has substantially the
same duties as in informal discussion except that he should keep
himself more in the background as chairman of the panel.
He can do so because each member of the panel is in reality an
assistant to the leader and is responsible for specific contributions to
the proceedings.
When the subject is thrown open to the house, it is the leader's job
to recognize appropriate questions and to reject those not bearing
on the subject or involving personalities.
Some questions he may answer himself, but usually he should
repeat the question and call upon one of the panel to answer it.
By preliminary announcement the leader may also tell the audience
that they may direct questions at particular members of the panel if
they choose.
In any case, during the question period the leader needs to maintain
strict control.On many occasions this may be the toughest part of his
assignment to carry off efficiently and with good humor.
While it is customary to confine audience questions to a specific
period, some leaders permit questions from the floor at any time.
Unless very carefully limited by the leader, this practice may
interfere with effective discussion by the panel.
Arranging the panel properly will lend effectiveness to this form of
Arranging the panel properly will lend effectiveness to this form of
discussion.The members should face the audience.It is important
that each panel member adjust his chair so that he can see every
other member without effort the chairman will also find that the best
places for his readiest speakers are at the extreme ends of the
table.He should keep the more reticent members close to, him so
that he can readily draw them out with direct questions.
If the quieter ones sit on the fringes of the panel, the more voluble
members are quite likely to monopolize the discussion.
919. All are principles of primary health care
     except?
 a) Intersectoral coordination

 b) Community participation

 c) Appropriate technology

 d) Decentralised approach



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Decentralised approach
o There are 4 main principles of primary health care :
1) Equitable distribution
2)Community participation
3)Intersectorial coordination
4) A ppro priate technology
920. Screening under RNTCP emphasizes on:
 a) Sputum microscopy

 b) Chest X-ray

 c) PCR

 d) Sputum culture



Correct Answer - A
Ans. a. Sputum microscopy
Over-reliance on chesl X-ray was a draw back of National
Tuberculosis Programme (NTP) which was over come by Revised
National Tuberculosis Control Programme(RNTCP) which started
diagnosing patient by sputum microscopy
'A nation-wide network of RNTCP qaality assured designated
sputum smear microscopy laboratories has been set
up, providing appropriate, available, affordable and accessible
diagnostic services for TB suspects and cases.
921. Which of the following screening methods is used under RNTCP?
 a) Active

 b) Passive

 c) Mass

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - B
Under RNTCP, active case finding is not pursued. Case finding is passive. Patients
presenting themselves with symptoms suggesting tuberculosis are screened with two
sputum smear examinations.

Ref: Park 21st edition, page 381.
922. Drug NOT used in pulmonary
     hypertension ‑
 a) Calcium channel blocker

 b) Endothelin receptor antagonist

 c) Alpha blocker

 d) Prostacyclin



Correct Answer - C
alpha blockers [Ref- Harrison 17th/e p 1577, 1578] Pulmonary
hypertension
General management
Diuretic therapy may be useful as it relieves pulmonary edema.
Anticoagulant therapy is advocated for all patients.
Specific management
Calcium channel blockers
Patients who have substantial reductions in pulmonary arterial
pressure in response to short acting vasodilators at the time of
cardiac catheterization should he initially treated with calcium
channel blockers.
Endothelin receptor antagonist
Bostenan is a non-selective endothelium receptor antagonist, is an
approved t/t ,for patients who are NYHA .functional classes III and
IV.
Phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitors
Slidenafil is used for patients who are NYHA functional classes II
and
Prostacyclins
Iloprost is a prostacyclin analogue used in PAH patients who are
NYHA functional classes III and IV.
Pulmonary circulation is unique in that it accommodates a blood flow
that is almost equal to that of all the other organs of body but still
maintains low pressure.
The factors responsible for low pressure in pulmonary circulation
(even with large volume of blood) are:- - Larger diameter of
pulmonary vessels due to thin wall of pulmonary artery and
arterioles.
- Greater compliance (distensibility) of pulmonary vessels.
numoral factors responsible for maintaining pulmonary circulation:?
Normally
NO causes vosodilation and proliferation of smooth muscles by r in
the conc. of cGMP —) this increases the diameter of pulmonary
vessels.
causes vosodilation and decreased proliferation of smooth muscles
by increasing the conc. of cAMPincrease in the diameter of
pulmonary vessels. Prostaglandin also decreases coagulation.
Endothelin causes vasoconstriction and increase smooth muscle
proliferation si lumen of pulmonary vessels. - Normally the
vasodilators and antiprolifeave effects of NO and PGI7 dominate
In Pulmonary hypertension

There is l production of NO (and cGMP) and PGI2 (and cAMP), t
vasoconstriction and proliferation of smooth

muscles, st lumen of pulmonary vessel. Decreased production of
PGI2 also causes increased coagulation.

There is T production of endothelin, /vasoconstriction and smooth
muscle proliferation, .1 lumen.
Drug therapy in puhnonan, hypertension is targetted at these growth
factor pathways which are involved in the pathogenesis of
pulmonary hypertension:
Endothelium receptor antagonist
Bostenan is an endothelin receptor antagonist. It prevents
endothelin mediated contraction of vessels. Phosphodiesterase-5
inhibitors
Nitric oxide mediates its action through increasing cGMP
concentration. Increased cGMP relaxes the vessels. cGMP is
degraded by an enzyme phosphodiesterase-5 (PDE-5).
- Slidenafanil is a phosphodiesterase 5 inhibitor. It reduces the
degradation of cGMP, thus causing vascular relaxation and reducing
pulmonary hypertension.
Prostacyclins
In pulmonary hypertension, the level of prostacycline is reduced.
This causes pulmonary constriction as prostacyclin causes dilatation
of pulmonary vessels.
923. Regarding PPV vaccine following is true
     ?
 a) Given at birth

 b) Obtained from cell wall polysaccharide

 c) Indicated in sickle cell disease

 d) Commonly used



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Indicated in sickle cell disease [Ref Essentials of
microbiology ydie p. 391]
Pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine (PPV or PPSV) is prepared
from capsular (not cell wall) polysaccharide. It is not given before 2
years of age
It is not for general use, but given in conditions which predispose to
pneumococcal infection, like sickle cell anemia.
   924. All are included in sleep hygiene except
        ?
    a) Healthy diet

    b) Sleeping on time

    c) Sleeping in dark room

    d) Exercise before sleep



   Correct Answer - D
   Ans. is 'd' i.e.,Exercise before sleep [Ref Comprehensive Guide
   for sleep p.173]
   Sleep hygiene can be considered the cornerstone of environmental
   modification and consists of developing good sleep habits and an
   environment that is conducive to sleep.
   Sleep hygiene includes the physical sleep setting, sleep schedule
   and sleep practices (e.g. pre-bedtime routine), all of which influence
   effective sleep.
   The principles of sleep hygiene include ?
1. Eating a healthy diet
2. Limiting amount of caffeine intake
3. Going to bed and getting out of bed at consistent time
4. Sleeping in dark, quiete and temperature controlled rook on a
   comfortable mattress and pillow.
925. A problem village is defined as if water
     source is ?
 a) > 0.5 km

 b) > 1 km

 c) > 1.6 km

 d) None of the above



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., > 1.6 km [Ref Park 22"`I le p. 428 & 21"/e p. 418]
A problem village has been defined as one
Where no source of safe water is available within a distance of 1.6
km, or
Where water is available at a depth of more than 15 meters, or
Where water source has excess salinity, iron, fluorides and other
toxic elements, or
Where water is exposed to the risk of cholera.
   926. Not true about strategic plan for malaria
        control 2012​2017 ?
    a) Objective is API < 1 per 10,000

    b) 50% reduction in mortality by 2017

    c) Annual incidence < 10 per 1000 by 2017

    d) Complete treatment to at least 80% of patients



   Correct Answer - C
   Ans. is 'c' i.e., Annual incidence < 10 per 1000 by 2017
   Strategic action plan for malaria control in India : 2012-2017
   Objective of plan is to achieve API < 1 per 10,000 population by
   the end of 2017.
   Goals of strategic plan are :
1. Screnning all fever cases suspected for malaria (60% through
   quality microscopy and 40% by rapid diagnostic test).
2. Treating all P. falciparum cases with full course of effective ACT and
   primaquine, and all P. vivax cases with 3 days chloroquine and 14
   days primaquine.
3. Equipping all health institutions (PHC level and above), especiality in
   high-risk areas, with microscopy facility and RDT for emergency use
   and injectable artemisinin derivatives.
927. Observation under nursing care for 24
     hours in an hospital is defined as ?
 a) Inpatient

 b) Outpatient

 c) Observation status patient

 d) Urgent care patient



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Observation status patient
Observation status patients : These are neither inpatients nor
outpatients. These patients are placed in a hospital bed (often in an
inpatient unit) after displaying signs/symptoms that require additional
work-up. Observational stay is usually limited to 24 hours then the
physician must determine whether patient's condition warrants
inpatient addmission or discharge. If the patient is discharged it is
called observation status pedient, however if the patient is admitted
to the hospital then status is changed to inpatient.
Inpatient : A patient is admitted in hospital room for an overnight or
more than that.
Outpatient : A patient receives a diagnosis and/or treatment but
does not stay overnight.
928. Under RNTCP, DOTS provider gets how
     much honorarium after completion of
     treatment ?

 a) 150 Rs

 b) 250 Rs

 c) 500 Rs

 d) 1000 Rs



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b i.e., 250 Rs [Ref www.pbnrhm.org]
Honorarium to DOT provider for cure or completed TB patient
treatment is 250 Rs per care.
929.
All of the following are are a part of medial
wall of the middle ear except?
 a) Promontory

 b) Fenestra vestibule

 c) Pyramid

 d) Subiculum



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e.,Pyramid [Ref Dhingra Save p. 6]
Medial or inner or labyrinthic wall (paries labyrinthica) of middle
ear
It is formed by labyrinth and separates the middle ear cavity from
internal ear. It has following features :- A bulge called as
promontory formed by basal turn of cochlea.
Fenestra vestibuli (oval window) lies posterosuperior (behind and
above) to the promontory and opens into scala vestibuli.
It is occupied by foot plate of stapes fixed by annular ligament.
Its, size on average is 3.25 mm long & 1.75 mm wide.
Fenestra cochleae (round window) lies posteroinferior to the
promontory and opens into scala tympani of cochlea. It is closed by
secondary tympanic membrane. The round window is closest to
ampulla of posterior semicircular canal. Round window is a
triangular opening. Its diameter is between 1.8 to 2.3 mm.
930. True statement about malignant otitis
     externa is:
a) Not painful

b) Common in diabetics and old age

c) Caused by streptococcus

d) All of the above



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is. B. Common in diabetics and old age
931. What is the intensity in decibel of normal
     conversation in humans?
 a) 30dB

 b) 60dB

 c) 90dB

 d) 150dB



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., 60dB [Ref Dhingra 5thle p. 23]
Intensity is the strength of sound which determines its loudness. It is
usually measured in decibels (dB).
Following are intensities when a person is at a distance of one meter
from sound source.
Whisper                30 dB
Normal conversation60 dB
Shout                  90 dB
Discomfort of ear      120 dB
Pain in ear            130 dB
932. Ceruminous glands present in the ear
     are:
a) Modified eccrine glands

b) Modified apocrine glands

c) Mucous gland

d) Modified holocrine glands



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is. B. Modified apocrine glands
933. Afollowing
        patient with ear complaints showed positive Hennebert sign. Which of the
                condition shows positive Hennebert sign?

 a) Meniere's disease

 b) Acoustic neuroma

 c) Neuronitis

 d) Glossopharyngeal neuralgia



Correct Answer - A
The presence of a fistula is suspected if nystagmus occurs or if the patient perceives
movement of a visual target that is fixed after applying positive pressure to the outer ear
canal.
A positive test result (ie, Hennebert sign) suggests either a perilymph fistula or
Meniere's disease.
934. Light house sign in seen in ASOM in
     which stage?
 a) Stage of suppuration

 b) Stage of hyperaemia

 c) Stage of resolution

 d) Stage of pre-suppuration



Correct Answer - A

In the stage of supperation of ASOM, pus formation occurs,
hence in this stage pulsatile otorrhea or light house sign in
seen.
   935. What is the role of Sodium Fluoride in
        otosclerosis?
    a) It restores the electrolyte equilibrium

    b) It hastens recovery of the Overstimulated Cochlea

    c) It quickens the maturity of the active focus and reduces
       osteoclastic resorption

    d) It repolarizes the cochlear cells



   Correct Answer - C
   Ans. is 'c' i.e., It quickens the maturity of the active focus and
   reduces osteoclastic resorption
   [Ref Current Diagnosis and treatment in Otolaryngology 2nd/e
   p. 678; Otosclerosis and Stapedectomy: Diagnosis,
   Management, and Complication by Glasscock (7hieme) 1st
   (2004) p. 61, 62]
   Mechanism of action of Sodium fluoride in otosclerosis
1. Reduces osteoclastic bone resorption and increases osteoblastic
   bone formation : These actions reduce bone remodelling in actively
   expanding osteolytic lesions and promote recalcification.
2. Inhibits proteolytic enzymes that are cytotoxic to the cochlea :
   Inhibition of proteolyic enzymes that are cytotoxic to the cochlea is
   believed to prevent sensorineural deafness.
936. Chemical labyrinthectomy by
     transtympanic route is done in Meniere's
     disease using which drug?
 a) Amikacin

 b) Gentamicin

 c) Amoxycillin

 d) Cyclosporine



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Gentamicin [Ref Levine SC, Haberkamp TJ.
Labyrinthectomy to correct vertigo
Operative techniques in otolaryngology - Head & neck surgery.
2001. 12:141-143.]
Chemical labyrinthectomy in meneires disease is done using
Gentamicin locally.
937. Which of the following tests is not used
     to differentiate between cochlear and
     retrocochlear hearing loss?
 a) SISI TEST

 b) Evoked response audiometry

 c) Threshold tone decay test

 d) Recruitment



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Threshold tone decay test [Ref Dhingra 5th/e p.
31; zr/e p. 28]
938. When does the rudimentary cochlea
     develop in the fetus?
 a) First week

 b) 4th to 8th week

 c) 8th to 12th week

 d) 16 to 20th week



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., 4th to 8th week [Ref Chap 172-Teview of medical
embryology-Ben Pasky]
Development of Inner ear
After implantation, around the second to third week the developing
embryo consists of three layers: endoderm, mesoderm
andectoderm.
The first part of the ear to develop is the inner ear,which begins to
form from the ectoderm around the 22nd day of the embryo's
development. Specifically, the inner ear derives from two thickenings
called otic placodes on either side of the head. Each otic placode
recedes below the ectoderm, forms an otic pit and then an otic
vesicle. This entire mass will eventually become surrounded by
mesenchyme to form the bony labyrinth.
Around the 33'd day of development, the vesicles begin to
differentiate. Closer to the back of the embryo, they form what will
become the utricle and semicircular canals. Closer to the front of the
embryo, the vesicles differentiate into a rudimentary saccule, which
will eventually become the saccule and cochlea.
Part of the saccule will eventually give rise and connect to the
cochlear duct. This duct appears approximately during the sixth
week and connects to the saccule through the ductus reuniens.
939. Otosclerosis affects which bone?
 a) Stapes

 b) Incus

 c) Malleus

 d) None



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Stapes
Types of otosclerosis
Following types of otosclerosis have been described :-
1. Fenesteral or stapedial otosclerosis
It is the most common type (80-90%) The lesion starts just in front of
the oval window in an area called fissula ante fenestram" and
causes stapes footplate fixation and conductive hearing loss.
Hearing loss is purely mechanical.
2. Cochlear otosclerosis (Retrofenestral otosclerosis)
When present, it is almost always associated with stapedial
(fenestral) otosclerosis. It involves region of round window or other
areas in the otic capsule. It causes mixed or sensorineural hearing
loss which is believed to be toxic due to diffusion of cytotoxic
enzymes into the fluid of the membranous labyrinth (In contrast to
stapedial otosclerosis, where the deafness is purely mechanical and
is conductive). Tinnitus is more common in cochlear otosclerosis.
3. Histologic otosclerosis
This type of otosclerosis remains asymptomatic and causes neither
conductive nor sensorineural hearing loss.
940. External auditory canal is formed by:
 a) 1s branchial groove
     t




 b) 1st visceral pouch

 c) 2nd branchial groove

 d) 2nd visceral pouch



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is. A. 1st branchial groove
941. Which perforation of the tympanic
     membrane is most commonly seen with
     tubotympanic CSOM?
 a) Central

 b) Anterosuperior

 c) Posterosuperior

 d) Posteroinferior



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Central [Ref Dhingra 5thle p. 77; Pediatric
otolaryngology 2"/e p. 478] Tubotympanic CSOM
It is also known as safe ear as it does not cause any serious
complications
Infection is is limited to antero-inferior part of middle ear cleft
(eustachain tube & mesotympanum) and is associated with central
perforation in pars tensa of tympanic membrane.
942. Most common cause of otitis externa is?
 a) Fungal infection

 b) Bacterial infection

 c) Seborrheic disease

 d) Herpes Zoster



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Bacterial infection [Ref Clinical ENT 5th/e p. 223]
Most common cause of otitis externa is bacterial infection.
Two most common causative bacteria are staphylococcus aureus
and pseudomonas
943. Which of the following is a cause of
     objective tinnitus?
 a) Impacted Wax

 b) Carotid artery aneurysm

 c) Meniere's disease

 d) Ototoxic drugs



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Carotid artery aneurysm [Refi Dhingra Sth/e p.
145; Scott Brown's 7th/e Vol-3 p. 4029-4030;Tuli p. 125-126]
944. Pulsatile tinnitus is a feature of ?
 a) Glomus tumour

 b) acoustic neuroma

 c) malignant otits externa

 d) meneire's disease



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Glomus tumour [Ref Logan Turner 10th/e p. 214]
The earliest symptoms of glomus tumour is pulsatile tinnitus
(earliest) and hearing loss. Hearing loss is conductive and slowly
progressive. These are followed by blood stained otorrhoea and
earache.
945. Histelberger's sign is seen in?
 a) Acoustic neurom

 b) Glomus Tumour

 c) Nasal angiofibroma

 d) Acute suppurative otitis media



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Acoustic neurom [Ref Acta Otorhinolaryngol
Belg. 1987;41(1):40-8.The Hitselberger sign as a perception
phenomenon. Benz B, Baumgarten D.]
Hitselberger's sign
In Acoustic neuroma - loss of sensation in the postero-superior part
of external auditory meatus supplied by Arnold's nerve (branch of
Vagus nerve to ear).
946. Ethmoidal infundibulum lies between ?
 a) Bulla ethmoidalis and uncinate process of ethmoid

 b) Middle and inferior turbinate

 c) Hiatus semilunaris and Inferior meatus

 d) Wing of sphenoid and maxillary antrum



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Bulla ethmoidalis and uncinate process of
ethmoid
The hiatus semilunaris is bounded inferiorly by the sharp concave
margin of the uncinate process of the ethmoid bone, and leads into a
curved channel, the infundibulum, bounded above by the bulla
ethmoidalis and below by the lateral surface of the uncinate process
of the ethmoid.
947. What lies between the middle and
     inferior turbinate?
 a) Middle meatus

 b) Superior meatus

 c) Hiatus semmilunaris

 d) Inferior meatus



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Middle meatus [Ref Scott Brown 7'Ve vol 2 p.
1329]
Superior meatus → * Below superior turbinate (between superior
and middle turbinates)
Middle meatus → Below middle turbinate (between middle and
inferior turbinates)
Inferior meatus → Below inferior turbinate.
948.
The narrowest part of the nasal cavity is ?
 a) Internal nasal valve

 b) Antrochoanal region

 c) 1st nasal turbinate

 d) Region of inferior concha



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Internal nasal valve [Ref Jafek BW. Anatomy and
physiology of the nose. Jafek BW, Stark AK, eds. ENT Secrets.
Philadelphia, Pa: Hanley & Belfus; 1996. 77-83.]
The internal nasal valve involves the area bounded by upper lateral
cartilage, septum, nasal floor, and anterior head of the inferior
turbinate. This makes up the narrowest portion of the nasal airway
949.
Narrowest part of the nasal cavity is ?
 a) Vestibule

 b) Choanae

 c) Inferior turbinate

 d) Middle turbinate



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Inferior turbinate [Ref Heidari Z, Mahmoudzadeh-
Sagheb H, Khammar T, Khammar M (May 2009).
"Anthropometric measurements of the external nose in 18-25-
year-old Sistani and Baluch aborigine women in the southeast
of Iran". Folia Morphol. (Warsz) 68 (2): 88-92]
The internal nasal valve comprises the area bounded by the upper
lateral-cartilage, the septum, the nasal floor, and the anterior head of
the inferior turbinate. In the narrow (leptorrhine) nose, this is the
narrowest portion of the nasal airway.
  950. Saddle nose deformity is seen in?
    a) Primary Syphilis

    b) Secondary syphilis

    c) Tertiary syphilis

    d) Lupus Vulgaris



   Correct Answer - C
   Ans. is 'c' i.e., Tertiary syphilis [Ref Dhingra 5th/e p. 184]
   Syphilis of nose occurs as :-
1. Primary :- Rare and manifests as primary chancre of the vestibule.
2. Secondary :- Rarely recognized and manifests as simple rhinitis,
   crusting and fissuring.
3. Tertiary :- This is the stage in which nose is involved most
   commonly. There is formation of gumma followed by bony
   perforation of nasal septum. Bridge of the nose collapses causing a
   saddle deformity. Atrophic rhinitis may occur as a complication.
951. All of the following are true about
     vasomotor rhinitis except ?
 a) It is allergic

 b) It is due to parasympathetic overactivity

 c) Resistant cases may need cryotherapy

 d) It may lead to hypertrophic rhinitis



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' It is allergic [Ref Scott's Brown 7thie p. 2122]
Vasomotor rhinitis
Vasomotor rhinitis is a nonallergic condition that involves a constant
runny nose, sneezing and nasal congestion, i.e., the nose is stuffy or
runny for reasons other than allergies and infections. The exact
etiology is unknown, but triggers include emotions, odors, poor air
quality, spicy foods, and medication side effects.
952. All of the following are true about
     vasomotor rhinitis except?
 a) It is a nonallergic condition

 b) it is due to parasympathetic overactivity

 c) It may cause paroxysmal episodes of sneezing

 d) It is an infective condition



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., It is an infective condition [Ref Dhingra 5th/e p.
170]
953. In evaluation of a case of immotile nasal
     cilia, which of the following
     investigations should prove useful?
 a) Rhinogram

 b) Xray nasal and paranasal sinuses

 c) Sweat sodium levels

 d) Nitric oxide test



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Nitric oxide test [Ref Leigh MW, Pittman JE,
Carson JL, Ferkol TW, Dell SD, Davis SD. Clinical and genetic
aspects of primary ciliary dyskinesia/Kartagener syndrome.
Genet Med. 2009 Jul. 11(7):473-87]
Screening tests for immotile cilia syndrome
Nitric oxide : Measuring exhaled nasal nitric oxide, which is mostly
reduced in primary ciliary dyskinesia, is a good screening test for
immotile-cilia syndrome with a good negative predictive value.
Studies have demonstrated a relationship between nasal nitric oxide
levels, nasal oxide synthase mRNA expression, and ciliary beat
frequency. There is also a significant inverse correlation between the
degree of aplasia and/or hypoplasia of the paranasal sinus and
nasal nitric oxide values in primary ciliary dyskinesia patients.
954. All of the following are features of
     ethmoidal polyp except ?
 a) Common in adults

 b) Commonly Singular

 c) Commonly bilateral

 d) Is usually allergic



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is `b' i.e., Commonly Singular [Ref Dhingra 5thle p. 187; Tuli
1"/e p. 173]
Antrochoanal polyp grows backward (posteriorly), therefore, it may
not be visible on anterior rhinoscopy, while posterior rhinoscopy
shows smooth, greyish white, spherical mass in choana.
On the other hand, ethmoidal polyps grow anteriorly. Therefore, they
are best seen on anterior rhinoscopy and may not be seen on
posterior rhinoscopy.
   955. All of the following are treatments of
        multiple bilateral ethmoidal polyps
        except?
    a) Functional endoscopic sinus surgery

    b) Intranasal ethmoidectomy

    c) Extranasal ethmoidectomy

    d) Caldwll Luc Surgery



   Correct Answer - D
   Ans. is 'd' i.e., Caldwil Luc Surgery [Ref Scott Brown, Vol-IL
   p.1701; Dhingra 5`"/e p. 188, 430]
   Surgical treatment of ethmoidal polyps :
1. Functional endoscopic sinus surgery (FESS) : Surgery of choice
   when available.
2. Polypectomy : When there are one or two pedunculated polyps.
3. Intranasal ethmoidectomy : Indicated when polyps are multiple and
   sessile.
4. Extranasal ethmoidectomy : This is indicated when polyps recur
   after intranasal procedures.
5. Transantral ethmoidectomy : Indicated when infection and polypoidal
   changes are also seen in the maxillary antrum. In this case antrum is
   opened by caldwell-Luc approach and the ethmoidal air cells
   approached through the medial wall of the antrum.
956. What is the treatment of choice for
     ethmoidal polyps?
 a) Functional Endoscopic sinus surgery with polypectomy

 b) Intranasal ethmoidectomy

 c) Extranasl ethmoidectomy

 d) Transantral ethmoidectomy



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e.,Functional Endoscopic sinus surgery with
polypectomy [Ref See above explanation]
957.      The artery which leads to bleeding in
                   Woodruff's area is?
 a) Anterior ethmoidal artery

 b) Sphenopalatine artery

 c) Greater palatine artery

 d) Superior labial artery



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Sphenopalatine artery [Ref Scott Brown 7h/e Vol-
2p. 1597; Dhingra 5th/e p. 190]
Woodruff's area : ?
It is situated under the posterior end of inferior turbinate.
Sphenopalatine artery anastomoses with posterior pharyngeal artery
here. Posterior epistaxis occurs in this area.
  958. Intrathecal fluorescein with endoscopic
       visualization is useful in diagnosis of?
    a) Deviated nasal septum

    b) Multiple ethmoidal polyps

    c) Rhinitis Medicamentosa

    d) CSF Rhinorrhoea



   Correct Answer - D
   Ans. is 'd' i.e., CSF Rhinorrhoea [ Ref: Logan Turner 10(h/e p.
   28, Dhingra 5th/e p. 179]
   Detection of site of CSF leak in CSF Rhinorrhoea
1. HRCT : - HRCT with or without godolinium is the most helpful study
   for identifying the site of leak, i.e., investigation of choice.
2. MRI : - MRI with heavy T2 weighted image may highlight CSF
   sufficiently to show the leak.
3. CT cisternography : - CT scan after injection of contrast dye is
   effective in patients with an active leak.
4. Radioisotope cisternography : - Radioisotope injected intrathecally
   and measured.
5. Fluorescin dye : - Intrathecal fluorescin with endoscopic
   visualization.
959. All of the following are features of a
     nasal foreign body except?
 a) Foul smelling discharge

 b) Epistaxis

 c) Nasal obstruction

 d) Septal perforation



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Septal perforation [Ref Dhingra SaVe p. 176;
Logan Turner 10'h/e p. 63]
Foreign body in nose
A nasal foreign body is anything that gets stuck inside the nose.
Inanimate foreign body (object) is more common than animate
foreign body. Common objects found in noses include food material
(peas, beans, nuts), tissue paper, beads, toys and rocks. Animate
foreign bodies are worms, larvae or maggots. Most cases of foreign
bodies in the nose and nasal cavity are not serious and occur in
toddlers and children from 1-8 years. Because children develop the
ability to pick up objects at about the age of 9 months, this problem
is much less common before 9 months of age.
960. All of the following are features of a
     nasal foreign body except?
 a) Vestibulitis

 b) Epistaxis

 c) Nasal obstruction

 d) Deviated septum



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Deviated septum [Ref Dhingra 5thie p. 176; Logan
Turner 10`"/e p. 63]
961.
All of the following are causes of perforation
of cartilaginous part of nasal septum except?
 a) Tuberculosis

 b) Leprosy

 c) Lupus

 d) Syphilis



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Syphilis [Ref Dhingra 5th/e p. 166; Scott-Brown's
Otolaryngology 7th/e Vol-2 chapter-124 p. 1583]
A nasal septal perforation is a through-and-through defect in any
portion of the cartilaginous or bony septum with no overlying
mucoperichondrium or mucoperiosteum on either side.
Perforation of bony part :- Syphilis
Perforation of cartilaginous part :- TB, leprosy, lupus.
962. All of the following are true about nasal
     myiasis except?
 a) Common in vasomotor rhinitis

 b) Intense nasal irritation present

 c) Meningitis may occur in severe disease

 d) Chloroform water is one of the modes of treatment



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Common in vasomotor rhinitis [Ref Dhingra 5th/e
p. 178]
963. ETHMOIDAL BULLAE are seen in?
 a) Posterior ethmoidal air cells

 b) Middle ethmoid air cells

 c) Superior ethmoidal air cells

 d) Inferior ethmoidal air cells



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Middle ethmoid air cells [Ref: Logan Turner 10th
le p. 379; Dhingra 5th/e p. 153, 154]
964. What is the type of epithelium of the
     adenoid?
 a) Pseudostratified ciliated columnar epithelium

 b) Non keratinized squamous epithelium

 c) Cuboidal epithelium

 d) Columnar epithelium with goblet cells



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Pseudostratified ciliated columnar epithelium
[Ref Wiatrak BJ, Woolley AL. Pharyngitis and adenoton​sillar
disease. Cummings CW, Fredrickson JM , Harker LA, Crause
CJ, Schuller DE, Richardson MA. Otolaryngology Head and
Neck Surgery. ..V/e. London: Mosby; 1998. 188-215.]
The adenoid is covered by a pseudostratified ciliated columnar
epithelium that is plicated to form numerous surface folds The
nasopharyngeal epithelium lines a series of mucosal folds, around
which the lymphoid parenchyma is organized into follicles and is
subdivided into 4 lobes by connective tissue septa Seromucous
glands lie within the connective tissue, and their ducts extend
through the parenchyma and reach the nasopharyngeal surface.
965. All of the following are features of
     enlarged adenoids except?
 a) Otitis media

 b) Nasal obstruction

 c) Failure to thrive of child

 d) Esophagitis



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Esophagitis [Ref Dhingra Vie p. 254]
Clinical features of enlarged adenoids
Enlarged and infected adenoids may cause nasal, aural (ear),
and general symptoms.
1) Nasal symptoms
Nasal obstruction is the commonest symptom. This result in mouth
breathing. As the respiration and feeding cannot take place
simultaneously, child fails to thrive.
Other symptoms are nasal discharge (wet bubbly nose), sinusitis,
epistaxis and toneless voice with loss of nasal quality (Rhinololia
clausa).
2) Aural symptoms
Tubal obstruction
Otitis media :- Recurrent acute otitis media, CSOM, serous otitis
media
3) General symptoms
Adenoidfacies: Elong at edface with dullex pression,open
mouth,prominent & crow dedup per teeth, hit chedup perlip, pinched
in appearance of nose and high arched palate. Pulmonary
hypertension, aprosexia (lack of concentration).
966. Anterior tonsillar pillar is formed by?
 a) Palatopharyngeal fold

 b) Palatoglossal fold

 c) Pterygopalatine arch

 d) Valleculae



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Palatoglossal fold
Anterior tonsillar pillar- Palatoglossal fold
Posterior tonsillar pillar- Palatopharyngeal fold
967. One of the following is true regarding
     Zenker diverticulum ?
 a) It is a pulsion diverticulum

 b) It projects anteriorly

 c) Commonly seen in young males

 d) It is between superior and middle constrictor



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'A' i.e., It is a pulsion diverticulum
Hypopharyngeal diverticulum or Zenker's diverticulum or
pharyngeal pouch
It is a pulsion diverticulum where pharyngeal mucosa herniates
through the Killian's dehiscence, a weak area between two parts of
the inferior constrictor.
It is the most common esophageal diverticulum.
The diverticula arise posteriorly in the midline of neck. The mouth of
the diverticula is in the midline but projects laterally (usually left
laterally )
Zenker's diverticula are rarely seen below 30 yrs of age, most
patients are over 50.
  968. All of the following are extrinsic
       laryngeal membranes except?
   a) Quadrangular membrane

   b) Hyoepiglottic ligament

   c) Cricotracheal membrane

   d) Thyrohyoid membrane



   Correct Answer - A
   Ans. is 'a' i.e., Quadrangular membrane
   [Ref Merati AL, Bielamowicz SA. Textbook of Laryngology. San
   Diego: Plural Publishing Inc 2006.]
   Quadrangular membrane
1. Aryepiglottic ligament (superior border of membrane)
2. Vestibular ligament (Inferior border of membrane
969. All of the following are true about
     Spasmoidic Dysphonia except ?
a) It may be of adductor or abductor type

b) Abductor type is characterized by Whispering quality of voice

c) Adductor type is characterized by Breathlessness

d) It is focal Laryngeal dystonia



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Adductor type is characterized by
Breathlessness
[RefiSulica L (December 2004). "Contemporary man​agement of
spasmodic dysphonia". Current Opinion in Otolaryngology &
Head and Neck Surgery. 12 (6)]
970. Which of the following cancers do not
     present with cervical lymphnode
     involvement?
 a) Glottic Cancer

 b) Subglottic Cancer

 c) Papillary thyroid cancer

 d) Oral cancer



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Glottic Cancer [Ref Dhingra 5th le p. 327; 41' p.
283]
True vocal cords are devoid of lymphatic, hence less chance of
cervical nodal metastasis
971. Which of the following is not a
     premalignant condition oral cancer?
 a) Leukoplakia

 b) Erythroplakia

 c) Oral submucous fibrosis

 d) Systemic Sclerosis



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Systemic Sclerosis [ Ref Devita 7"Ve p. 982;
Bailey & love 25`Ve p. 735]
Lesions with increased risk of malignancy in oral cancer
Premalignant condition :- Leukoplakia, Erythroplakia, Speckled
erythroplakia, chronic hyperplastic candidiasis.
Conditions increasing risk :- Oral submucous fibrosis, syphilitic
glossitis, sideropenic dysphagia (Peterson Kelly syndrome).
Risk is doubtful : - Oral lichen planus, DLE, Dyskeratosis congenita.
972. Which is the narrowest portion of the
     esophagus?
a) At the cricopharyngeal sphincter

b) At the crossing of the left main bronchus

c) At the level of the aortic arch

d) At the diagphragmatic aperture



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., At the cricopharyngeal sphincter
[Gray H. Chapter 35: Mediastinum. Standring S, ed. Gray's
Anatomy: The Anatomical Basis of Clinical Practice. 40`Ve New
York, NY: Churchill Livingstone Elsevier; 2008. 939-57.]
Cricopharyngeal sphincter is the narrowest portion of esophagus
973. All of the following are indications for
     tracheostomy except ?
 a) Coma after head injury

 b) Maxillofacial injury

 c) Bilateral abductor palsy

 d) Superior laryngeal nerve palsy



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Superior laryngeal nerve palsy [Ref Ajay
Yadav zithie p. 215; Dhingra 5thie p. 337]
Tracheostomy
A tracheostomy is a surgical procedure to create an opening through
the neck into the anterior wall of trachea.
A tube is usually placed through this opening to provide an airway
and to remove secretions from the lungs. The tube is
called tracheostomy tube.
974. In Caldwell Luc operation, the approach
     is through the?
 a) Sublabial Approach leading to opening of mandibular antrum

 b) Through the sphenopalatine recess

 c) Opening of maxillary antrum through gingivolabial approach

 d) Superior meatus



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Opening of maxillary antrum through
gingivolabial approach [Ref Dhingra Stile p. 422]
Caldwell-Luc operation is a process of opening the maxillary antrum
through canine fossa by sublabial approach and dealing with the
pathology inside the antrum.In this surgery, antrum is reached
through a incision in gingivolabial sulcus (from lateral incisor to
2"d molar) and then opening of antrum in this area.
975. Caldwell Luc Surgery has its approach to
     the maxillary antrum through ?
 a) Gingivolabial sulcus

 b) Inferior orbital rim

 c) Nasal septum

 d) Cribriform plate



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e.,Gingivolabial sulcus [Ref Dhingra 5thIe p. 422]
976.
   Submucosal resection is the treatment of
                choice of?
 a) DNS in adults

 b) DNS in children

 c) Sluder's Neuralgia

 d) Nasal polyp



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., DNS in adults [Ref Dhingra 5th /e p. 423]
Submucous resection (SMR) is a surgical procedure to correct the
deformity of nasal septum.
The principle of this procedure is to remove deviated cartilage and
bone from beneath the mucosal lining of nasal septum, leaving a
corrected septum largely composed of scar tissue.
Submucous resection is not advocated in children upto 17 years of
age as it may interfere with development of the facial bones.
977. All of the following are removed in
     vertical hemilaryngectomy except?
 a) Half Glottis

 b) Half Supraglottis

 c) Half tongue

 d) Half Subglottis



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Half tongue [Ref Dhingra 4th/e p. 284;
http://128.255.52.245/oto/Beta/database/contents]
Vertical hemilaryngectomy means excision of one half of the larynx
on one side, i.e., vertical half is removed which include vertical half
of supraglottis, glottis and subglottis.
Horizontal hemilaryngectomy is the excision of supraglottis only,
also known as supraglottic laryngectomy.
978. All of the following are complications of
     maxillary sinus lavage and insufflation
     except?
 a) Air embolism

 b) Orbital injury

 c) Epistaxis

 d) Facial nerve injury



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Facial nerve injury [Ref Schlemmer KD, Naidoo
SK. Complicated sinusitis in a developing country, a
retrospective review. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 2013 May
17]
Complication of Maxillary sinus lavage and insufflation
Complications of nonendoscopic drainage procedures can be minor
or severe.
The most common complication is failure to enter the sinus because
of improper positioning of the trocar, incomplete penetration of the
sinus mucosa, or the presence of a hypoplastic antrum.
Epistaxis may occur because of laceration of the nasal mucosa or
preexisting coagulopathies necessitating packing.
Severe complications include orbital injury, air embolism, and death
secondary to injection of air into the sinus.
979. Miracle fruit is used to change the taste
     from?
 a) Sour to Bitter

 b) Sour to Sweet

 c) Bitter to sweet

 d) Salty to sweet



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Sour to Sweet [Ref Peter Hanelt, ed.
(2001).Mansfeld's encyclopedia of agricultural and horticultural
crops 2. Springer. p. 1660. ISBN 3-540-41017-1.]
Miracle Fruit contains a glycoprotein called miraculin, which binds to
the tongue's taste buds when the fruit is consumed.
Miraculin acts as a sweetness inducer when it comes in contact with
acids, causing sour foods to taste sweet, temporarily.
980. The main muscle affected in congenital
     muscular torticollis is?
 a) Sternocleidomastoid

 b) Trapezius

 c) Scalenus Anticus

 d) Omohyoid



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Sternocleidomastoid
[Ref: Cooperman, Daniel R. (1997). Karmel-Ross, Karen, ed. "The
Differential Diag​nosis of Torticollis in Children". Physical &
Occupational Therapy in Pediatrics. 17 (2): 1-11]
The cause of congenital muscular torticollis is unclear. Birth trauma
or intrauterine malposition is considered to be the cause of damage
to the sternocleidomastoid muscle in the neck. Other alterations to
the muscle tissue arise from repetitive microtrauma within the womb
or a sudden change in the calcium concentration in the body which
causes a prolonged period of muscle contraction.
981. Where is the auditory cortex located
     inside the brain?
 a) Superior temporal gyrus

 b) Inferior temporal gyrus

 c) Area 3,1,2

 d) Cingulate gyrus



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Superior temporal gyrus [Ref Pickles,
James 0. (2012). An Introduction to the Physiology of Hearing (4th
ed.). Bingley, UK: Emerald Group Publishing Limited, pp. 215-217.]
Primary Auditory Cortex is located bilaterally, roughly at the upper
sides of the temporal lobes - in humans on the superior temporal
plane, within the lateral fissure and comprising parts of Heschl's
gyrus and the superior temporal gyrus, including planum polare and
planum temporale (roughly Brodmann areas 41, 42, and partially
22).
982. All of the following are features of
     Tubotympanic CSOM except ?
 a) Profuse discharge

 b) Hearing loss

 c) Extreme pain

 d) Sometimes paradoxical improvement in hearing is seen



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Extreme pain [Ref Dhingra 5th/e p. 77; Pediatric
otolaryngology 2"/e p. 478]
Clinical features of tubotympanic CSOM
Profuse mucopurulent discharge which is not foul smelling, i.e., non-
foul smelling discharge
Hearing loss (conductive type). If sensorineural component also
occurs (i.e., mixed type), it arouses the suspicion of toxic deafness.
Sometimes, patient reports a paradoxical effect, i.e., hears better in
the presence of discharge than when the ear isdry. This is due to
round window shielding effect produced by discharge which helps to
maintain phase differential.
There is no pain, if it occurs it is due to associated otitis externa not
due to otitis media.
Since the infected area is open at both ends, discharge does not
accumulate in the middle ear cavity
Ossicular chain is mostly uninvolved, if involved only long process of
incus is involved.
983. Features of Usher's Syndrome include all
     except ?
 a) Night Blindness

 b) Visual Impairment

 c) Multiple Neurofibromas

 d) Hearing deficit



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Multiple Neurofibromas [Ref Mets MB, Young NM,
Pass A, Lasky JB (2000). "Early diagnosis of Usher syndrome in
children". Transactions of the American Ophthalmological
Society. 98: 237-45.]
Usher syndrome
Usher syndrome is a relatively rare genetic disorder caused by a
mutation in any one of at least 11 genes resulting in a combination
of hearing loss and visual impairment, and is a leading cause of
deafblindness. Usher syndrome is incurable at present.
Other names for Usher syndrome include Hallgren syndrome,
Usher-Hallgren syndrome, retinitis pigmentosa dysacusis syndrome,
and dystrophia retinae dysacusis syndrome.
This syndrome is characterized by hearing loss and a gradual visual
impairment. The hearing loss is caused by a defective inner ear,
whereas the vision loss results from retinitis pigmentosa (RP), a
degeneration of the retinal cells.Usually, the rod cells of the retina
are affected first, leading to early night blindness and the gradual
loss of peripheral vision. In other cases, early degeneration of the
cone cells in the macula occurs, leading to a loss of central acuity. In
some cases, the foveal vision is spared, leading to "doughnut
vision"; central and peripheral vision are intact, but an annulus exists
around the central region in which vision is impaired.
984. Which eye muscle has radial,
     longitudinal and circular fibres?
 a) Sphinctor Pupillae

 b) Dilator Pupillae

 c) Levator palpebrae Superioris

 d) Ciliary muscle



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Ciliary muscle
The ciliary muscle is a ring of smooth muscle in the eye's middle
layer (vascular layer) that controls accommodation for viewing
objects at varying distances and regulates the flow of aqueous
humour into Schlemm's canal.
It changes the shape of the lens within the eye.
The ciliary fibers have circular, longitudinal (meridional) and radial
orientations.
985. In primary open-angle glaucoma
     pilocarpine eye drops lowers the
     intraocular pressure by its direct action
     on the:
 a) Trabecular meshwork

 b) Ciliary epithelium

 c) Longitudinal fibres of the ciliary muscle

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D�
Pilocarpine as eye drops it is�used�to manage�angle closure
glaucoma�until surgery can be performed, ocular hypertension,
primary�open angle glaucoma, and to bring about constriction of
the pupil following its dilation.
Mechanism of�Action:
Pilocarpine�is�used�as a miotic and in the treatment of
glaucoma
Pilocarpine�contracts the ciliary muscle, causing increased tension
on the scleral spur and opening of the trabecular meshwork spaces
to facilitate outflow of aqueous humor. Outflow resistance
is�reduced,�lowering intraocular pressure�(IOP).
986. Axial length of eye ball is:
     March 2005
 a) 16 mm

 b) 20 mm

 c) 24 mm

 d) 28 mm



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C: 24 mm
The eye of the newborn is hypermetropic and the average axial
length is about 18mm.At the age of 3 years it is 23 mm and from age
3-14 years it increases by 1 mm.
In the emmetropic eye, the axial length (from the posterior corneal
surface to the retina) varies from 22 to 26 millimeters. In the
emmetropic eye (which has no refractive error), the range of corneal
refracting power is between 39 and 48 diopters, while the range of
lenticular refracting power is between 15 and 24 diopters.
987. Required for IOL power calculation ?
 a) Corneal topography

 b) Gonioscopy

 c) Indirect Ophthalmoscopy

 d) Keratometry



Correct Answer - D
Ans, D. Keratometry
IOL power calculation requires keratometry and biometry (axial
length of eyeball).
988. Sturm's conoid refers to configuration of
     the rays refracted through:
 a) Concave spherical surface

 b) Convex spherical surface

 c) Toric surface

 d) Irregular surface



Correct Answer - C
Ans. Toric surface
SturmS Conoid
 It is an optical condition in which the refractive power of lens or
cornea is not the same in all meridians, hence two focal points
separated by a focal interval are formed which is called the Sturm's
Conoid.
989. True about imaging spectrometry is ?
 a) Allows simultaneous measurements of reflectance spectra
    along a line

 b) Is useful in diagnosing against the rule astigmatism

 c) Spectrometry is an essential investigation before
    trabeculectomy

 d) It is based on the principle of Sturm's Conoid



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Allows simultaneous measurements of reflectance
spectra along a line
'Imaging sPectrometry is a new technique that permits simultaneous
measurements of reflectance spectra at different locations along a
line.
Results are three-dimensional images, whose coordinates are
location, wavelength, and reflectance.
A conventional fundus camera is adapted to a spectrograph and an
intensified charge coupled device (CCD) matrix detector system.
Considering the radiation transPort in single fundus layers, the local
distribution of the concentration-thickness product of xanthophyll,
melanin, and choroidal blood can be calculated'
   990. Refractory error measured by all except
        ?
    a) Keratometry

    b) Retinoscopy

    c) Refractometry

    d) Spectrometry



   Correct Answer - D
   Ans. D. Spectrometry
   The procedure of determining and correcting refractive errors
   is termed as reftaction. The refraction comprises two
   complementary methods : -
1. Objective methods: Objective methods of refraction include :- (i)
   Retinoscopy, (ii) Refractometry, (iii) Keratometry,
2. Subjective methods: These are :- (i) Subjective verification of
   refraction, (ii) Subjective refining of refraction, (iii) Subjective
   binocular balancing.
991. Ansiokonia is ?
 a) Projection of different coloured images into visual cortex

 b) Projection of different shaped images into visual cortex of two
    retinae

 c) Change in the velocity of perceived objects

 d) Partial intermittent visual loss



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Projection of different shaped images into visual cortex
of two retinae
Anisoeikonia is defined as a condition wherein the images projected
on the visual cortex from the two retinae are abnormally unequal in
size or shape-
992. Most powerful refractory surface of eye
     is -
 a) Conjunctiva

 b) Cornea

 c) Vitreous

 d) Lens



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Cornea
The cornea, with the anterior chamber and lens, refracts light, with
the cornea accounting for approximately two-thirds of the eye's total
optical power.
In humans, the refractive power of the cornea is approximately 43
dioptres.
The diopteric power of reduced eye is + 5OD, of which + 44D is
contributed by cornea and + 16D by the crystalline lens.
Total diaopteric power of schematic eye is + 58D, of which cornea
contributes +43D and the lens +15D.
993. Strabismic amblyopia is more common
     in patients with:
 a) Intermittent squint

 b) Alternate squint

 c) Constant squint

 d) Latent squint



Correct Answer - C
Ans. Constant squint
994. Astigmatism is defined as ?
 a) Refractory error wherein refraction varies along different
    meridians

 b) Refractory error due to long AP length of eye ball

 c) Varying refractory error in both eyes

 d) Varying Shape perception by both eyes



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Refractory error wherein refraction varies along
different meridians
Astigmatism is a type of refractive error wherein the refraction varies
in the different meridia.
Consequently, the rays of light entering in the eye cannot converge
to a point focus but form focal lines.
The refractive error of the astigmatic eye stems from a difference in
degree of curvature refraction of the two different meridians (i.e., the
eye has different focal point in different planes).
For example, the image may be clearly focused on retina in the
horizontal plane, but not in the vertical plane.
The most common cause of astigmatism is abnormality of corneal
curvature.
Other less common cause are lenticular (curvature abnormality of
lens,oblique position of lens) and retinal (oblique placement of
macula).
995. What is regular astigmatism?
a) Astigmatism in which the principal meridians are parallel

b) Astigmatism in which the principal meridians are perpendicular

c) Asymptomatic astigmatism

d) Astigmatism as a result of cataract surgery



Correct Answer - B
Regular stigmatism → Principal meridians are pendicular
Irregular astigmatism → Principal meridians are not
perpendicular.
996. Anteroposterior change in length of eye
                   is called ?
 a) Anisokonia

 b) Curvatural anisotropia

 c) Axial Ametropia

 d) Emmetropia



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Axial Ametropia
Ametropia (a condition of refractive error) is defined as a state of
refraction, wherein the parallel rays of light coming from infinity are
not focused on retina, rather focused either in front (in myopia) or
behind (in hypermetropia) the sensitive layer of retina.
Axial Ametropia:
It is the commonest form of ametropia (both myopia and
hypermetropia).
In hypermetropia, there is an axial shortening of eyeball.
So, image is formed behind the retina.
In myopia, there is an axial lengthening of eyeball.
So, image is formed in front of the retina.
1 mm change in axial length leads to ametropia of 3D.
For example 1 mm shortening in axial length causes hypermetropia
of 3D.
997. In a case of myopia, LASIK will provide
     correction upto ?
a) 20D

b) 12D

c) 6D

d) 4D



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. 12D
Surgical Procedure       Myopia correction
Radial Keratomy          -2to - 6D
Photorefractive keraotomy2to 6D
LASIK                    Upto - 12D
Extraction of lens       -16to -18D
Phakic IOL               >-12D
Intercorneal ring (ICR)  1-6D
998. What is reverse hypopyon?
 a) Collection of pus in the vireous

 b) Collection of emulsified silicon oil in anterior chamber

 c) Abscess in the orbit

 d) Seen in corneal ulcer close to being ruptured



Correct Answer - B
Ans, B. Collection of emulsified silicon oil in anterior chamber
Reverse hypopyon
Collection of silicon oil in the anterior chamber may lead to the
appearance of a reverse hypopyon.
This is due to the emulsified oil being less denser than the aqueous
layer
999. Pterygium all are true except:
 a) Arise from any part of conjunctiva

 b) Can cause astigmatism

 c) Surgery is treatment of choice

 d) UV exposure is risk factor



Correct Answer - A
Ans. Arise from any part of conjunctiva
  1000. Silk retina is seen in ?
    a) Hypermetropia

    b) Myopia

    c) Astigmatism

    d) Presbyopia



   Correct Answer - A
   Ans. A. Hypermetropia
   Clinical findings of hypermetropia
1. Small eyeball and cornea
2. Shallow anterior chamber
3. Fundus shows pseudopapillitis and shot silk appearance.
4. Degenerative retinoschisis
  1001. Pseudopapilitis with silk shot
        appearance is seen in?
    a) Hypermetropia

    b) Myopia

    c) Astigmatism

    d) Presbyopia



   Correct Answer - A
   Ans.A. Hypermetropia
   Clinical findings of hypermetropia
1. Small eyeball and cornea
2. Shallow anterior chamber
3. Fundus shows pseudopapillitis and shot silk appearance.
4. Degenerative retinoschisis
1002. 1mm change axial length of the eyeball
      would change the refracting power of
      the eye by ?
 a) 1D

 b) 2D

 c) 3D

 d) 4D



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. 3D
1 mm change in axial length leads to ametropia of 3D.
For example I mm shortening in axial length causes hypermetropia
of 3D.
1003. Lensometer detects ?
 a) Correct power of a pair of glasses

 b) Corneal topography

 c) Biochemical constitution of lens

 d) Power of IOL



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Correct power of a pair of glasses
Lensometer
A lensmeter or lensometer, also known as a focimeter or vertometer,
is an ophthalmic instrument.
It is mainly used by optometrists and opticians to verify the correct
prescription in a pair of eyeglasses, to properly orient and mark
uncut lenses, and to confirm the correct mounting of lenses in
spectacle frames.
Lensmeters can also verifr the power of contact lenses, if a special
lens support is used.
1004. All of the following are treatments of
      myopia except?
 a) LASIK

 b) Phakic intraocular lens

 c) Radial Keratotomy

 d) Holmium laser thermoplasty



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Holmium laser thermoplasty
Refractive surgeries for myopia
Radial keratotomy
Laser insitu keratomileusis (LASIK)
Phakic intraocular lens (IOL)
Orthokeratology
Photorefractive keratotomy (PRK)
Extraction oflens (Fucala's operation)
Intercorneal ring implantation
1005. Index myopia is seen in ?
 a) Nuclear cataracts

 b) Chorioretinitis

 c) Choroidal melanoma

 d) Posterior uveitis



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Nuclear cataracts
Nuclear changes of aging induce a modification of refractive index of
lens and produce an index myopia.
'Nuclear cataracts cause a general decrease in the transperancy of
the lens nucleus. They are associated with index myopia"
1006. Sudden painless loss of vision- All are
      causes except?
a) CRAO

b) CSR

c) Acute congestive glaucoma

d) Vitereous Hemorrhage



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Acute congestive glaucoma
1007. All are true regarding cornea except:
 a) Endothelium help in maintaining dehydrated state

 b) Oxygen is mostly derived by epithelium directly from the air
    through tear film

 c) Glucose supply for corneal metabolism is mainly derived from
    the aqueous

 d) Corneal thickness is more at center than periphery

 e) Richly vascular



Correct Answer - D:E
Answer- (D) Corneal thickness is more at center than periphery
(E) Richly vascular
Outer & fibrous coat of EYEBALL.
Transparent, anterior 1/6th segment of eyeball.
Non-vascular
Most of the refraction in eye occur at anterior surface of cornea (air-
tear interface) ,i.e., Anterior surface of cornea is the most important
refractive structure of eye.
The most actively metabolising layers of the cornea are epithelium &
endothelium.
1008. All of the following are causes Crystal
      keratopathy except?
 a) Cystinosis

 b) Schnyder's Dystrophy

 c) Bietti's Dystrophy

 d) Diabetes



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Diabetes
Causes of Crystalline Keratopathy :- Infections, Schnyder corneal
dystrophy, Bietti corneoretinal dystrophy, Cystinosis,
Lymphoproliferative disorders, Medication-induced.
1009. Corneal tattooing may be done
      with:
 a) Gold chloride

 b) Calcium chloride

 c) Copper sulfate

 d) Potassium permanganate



Correct Answer - A
Ans. Gold chloride
1010. Subconjunctival hemorrhages are
      evident in the following cases except ?
 a) Whooping cough

 b) Scurvy

 c) Purpura

 d) Pellagra



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Pellagra
Subconjunctival haemorrhage
Occurs due to the rupture of small vessels.
The condition, though unsightly, is trivial. This can occur
spontaneously in elderly people with fragile vessels or those with
systolic hypertension or after local ocular trauma or eye surgery.
Very minute ecchymoses, or possibly thromboses, are seen in
severe conjunctivitis; large extravasations accompany severe
straining, especially in old people, as on lifting heavy weights or
vomiting.
They are not infrequently seen in children with whooping cough and
may occur in scurvy, blood diseases such as purpura, or in malaria.
Recurrent subconjunctival haemorrhages warrant investigations for
a bleeding diatheses or leukaemia. The differential diagnosis
includes Kaposi sarcoma.
More serious are the large sub-conjunctival ecchymoses which seep
forwards from the fonix following head injuries. They are due to an
extravasation of blood along the floor of the orbit, secondary to a
fracture of the base of the skull.
In fractures of the sphenoid the blood appears later on the temporal
side than elsewhere.
Haemorrhages also result from severe or prolonged pressure on the
thorax and abdomen, as in persons squeezed in a crowd or by
machinery.
The blood gradually changes colour and gets absorbed in 1 to 3
weeks without treatment.
The use of aspirin and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
(NSAIDs) should be avoided and if mild ocular irritation is present,
artificial tears can be prescribed four to six times a day.
1011. Kayser Fleischer ring is found in which layer of cornea?
 a) Bowman's Capsule

 b) Substantia propria

 c) Descemet’s membrane

 d) Endothelium



Correct Answer - C
Kayser-Fleischer rings take the form of a crescentic rusty-brown discoloration of the
deepest layer of the cornea (Descemet membrane). In the purely hepatic stage of the
disease, the rings may not be evident (in 25 percent of cases), but they are virtually always
present (if properly sought) once the neurologic signs manifests. A slit-lamp examination
may be necessary for their early detection, particularly in brown-eyed patients, but in the
majority of patients with neurologic signs the rings can be visualized with the naked eye or
with the aid of an indirect ophthalmoscope focused on the limbus.
Also Know:
Kayser-Fleischer rings are a sign of Wilson's disease, which involves abnormal copper
handling by the liver resulting in copper accumulation in the body and is characterised by
abnormalities of the basal ganglia of the brain, liver cirrhosis, splenomegaly, involuntary
movements, muscle rigidity, psychiatric disturbances, dystonia and dysphagia. The
combination of neurological symptoms, a low blood ceruloplasmin level and KF
rings is diagnostic of Wilson's disease.

Ref: Ropper A.H., Samuels M.A. (2009). Chapter 37. Inherited Metabolic Diseases of the
Nervous System. In A.H. Ropper, M.A. Samuels (Eds),Adams and Victor's Principles of
Neurology, 9e.
1012. Kayser- Fleischer rings (KF rings) are seen in:
 a) Pterygium

 b) Hematochromatosis

 c) Wilson's disease

 d) Menke's kinked hair syndrome



Correct Answer - C
Wilson's disease
1013. Posterior staphyloma is seen in:
      September 2005
 a) Myopia

 b) Hypermetropia

 c) Astigmatism

 d) Presbyopia



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A: Myopia
Staphyloma is the term given to an eye whose sclero-uveal coats
are stretched (also known as ectasia). This most commonly occurs
posteriorly, athough anterior staphyloma also is recognised.
Posterior staphyloma
Progressive myopia (or mega myope) most common cause.
Glaucoma
Scleritis
Necrotizing infection
Surgery/trauma
Radiotherapy
Posterior staphyloma affects the posterior pole of the eye and is
lined by the choroid.
The ectatic portion is not visible externally but can be detected by
fundoscopy and B-scan USG.
Anterior staphyloma
The most common cause for anterior staphyloma is sloughing
corneal ulcer winch perforates and heals with the formation of a
pseudocornea by the organization of exudates and laying down of
fibrous tissue.
Differential diagnoses
Buphthalmos (congenital glaucoma)
Axial myopia
Macrophthalmos: seen in neurofibromatosis typel (NF1)
Coloboma
1014.
A 30 year old man presents to the clinic with pain in the eye, watering, redness and
photophobia. Examination of his eyes shows circumcorneal congestion and keratic
precipitates.

Assertion: KPs are proteinaceous deposits occurring in a triangular fashion in the
inferior part of cornea.

Reason: Mutton fat KPs are seen in granulomatous iridocyclitis and is composed of
epitheloid cells and macrophages.

 a) Both Assertion and Reason are true, and Reason is the correct
    explanation for Assertion

 b) Both Assertion and Reason are true, and Reason is not the
    correct explanation for Assertion

 c) Assertion is true, but Reason is false

 d) Assertion is false but reason is true



Correct Answer - B
Keratic precipitates are proteinaceous deposits occurring in a triangular fashion in the
inferior part of cornea due to convection currents in the aqueous humor. Mutton fat KPs are
seen in granulomatous iridocyclitis and is composed of epithelioid cells and macrophages.
They are usually 10-15 in number.

Ref: Comprehensive Ophthalmology by AK Khurana, 4th Edition, Page 142
1015. Scleritis is most commonly associated
      with:
      March 2005
 a) Diabetes

 b) Osteoarthritis

 c) Rheumatoid arthritis

 d) Hypertension



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C: Rheumatoid arthritis
Scleritis is a severe, destructive, chronic, painful, and potentially
blinding inflammatory disease of the Conjunctiva, Sclera and
Episclera tissues.
Symptoms includes redness and severe eye pain, which may radiate
to adjacent areas, the forehead, cheek, or behind the eye. This is
usually associated with light sensitivity, teary, and in some cases,
reduced or poor vision. The affected eye often has a bluish hue or
becomes an intense purple.
There are several different sub-types of Scleritis
Nodular Scleritis is characterized by a focal area of inflammation,
immovable, and tender, inflamed nodules on the eye.
Diffuse Scleritis
Diffuse Anterior Scleritis is the most common type, and is
characterized by widespread inflammation of the Anterior portion of
the Sclera, the white of the eye. The Diffuse type of Scleritis is,
fortunately, the most benign form of Scleritis and the most
responsive to therapy.
Necrotizing Scleritis is likely the worst form of the disease,
sometimes leading to loss of the eye from multiple complications,
severe pain, or occasionally perforation of the globe. It is often
associated with severe systemic disease and involvement of multiple
organs. An associated type of vascular inflammation, called
Vasculitis, may threaten the lives of those patients afflicted. Pain
with this condition is usually extreme, and damage to the Sclera is
often marked. Necrotizing scleritis also known as Scleromalacia
perforans is characterized by severe thinning of the Sclera of the
Eye, allowing for local outpouchings of the underlying dark Uveal
tissue. There are large abnormal blood vessels crossing areas of
Scleral loss. The condition occurs in an otherwise white and "quiet"
Eye, without pain. This type of Scleritis is associated with severe
Rheumatoid Arthritis, occasionally seen in Wegener's
Granulomatosis and Relapsing Polychondritis.
Posterior Scleritis is quite rare, but usually presents with poor or
double vision, severe pain, proptosis (forward displacement of the
eye), Uveitis (inflammation inside the Uvea Tract), and limitation of
eye movement. An exudative Retinal detachment (fluid under the
Retina) may cause severe visual loss, Angle-Closure Glaucoma
from Choroidal effusion.
About 50% of Scleritis patients are associated with systemic
autoimmune disorders including rheumatoid arthritis, gout, wegener
granulomatosis, Relapsing Polychondritis, Systemic Lupus
Erythematosus, Polyarteritis Nodosa, Ankylosing Spondylitis, with
infections, or chemical or physical injuries.
It occurs most often in people between the ages of 30 and 60 (it is
rare in children). Scleritis may be the initial or only presenting clinical
manifestation of these potentially lethal disorders.
1016. Unilateral frontal blisters with upper lid
      edema with conjunctivitis is seen in ?
 a) Acanthamoeba Keratits

 b) Herpes Simplex

 c) Herpes Zoster Ophthalmicus

 d) Neuroparalytic Keratitis



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Herpes Zoster Ophthalmicus
Ocular lesions : Combination of 2 or more of the following with
subsidence of skin eruptions : -
i) Conjunctivitis (Most common ocularlesion)
ii) Zoster keratitis :
Punctate keratitis, Microdendritic corneal ulcer (Pseudodendritic
Keratitis.), nummular anterior stromal keratitis, Disciform keratitis,
neuroparalytic ulceration, exposure keratitis, mucous plaque
keratitis, Keratouveitis with endothelitis , Sclerokeratitis (least
common).
The endothelium is a favoured site of attack and acute endothelial
cell loss occurs during herpes zoster keratouveitis.
iii) Episcleritis/Scleritis, Iridocyclitis (Uveitis).
iv) Acute retinal necrosis, anterior segment necrosis, phthisis bulbi.
v) Secondary glaucoma.
1017. Which organism can peneterate corneal
      endothelium?
 a) Aspergillus fumigatus

 b) Staphylococcus Aureus

 c) Neisseriae Gonorrhae

 d) Hemophilus influenza



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Aspergillus fumigatus
Fungi - Can penetrate intact corneal endothelium
Neisseria sp, C. Diptheriae, H,Aegyptus, Listeria- Can penetrate
intact corneal epithelium
1018. All of the following are true about Keratoconus, except:
 a) Increased curvature of corneaAstigmatism

 b) Astigmatism

 c) K.F ring cornea

 d) Thick cornea



Correct Answer - D
The main pathological changes in Keratoconus are thinning and
ectasia of the lens which occur as a result of defective synthesis of
mucopolysaccharide and collagen tissue.
1019. All of the following are true for
      sympathetic ophthalmitis except:
 a) Affects the injured eye

 b) Mostly results from a penetrating wound

 c) Autoimmune etiology

 d) Dalen Fuch's nodules may be seen



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A: Affects the injured eye
Sympathetic ophthalmitis is a condition in which serious
inflammation attacks the sound eye after injury to the other eye.
1020. Red keratic precipitates are seen in ?
 a) Granulomatous uveits

 b) Hemorrhagic uveitis

 c) Old healed uveitis

 d) Acute anterior uveitis



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is .b i.e., Hemorrhagic uveitis
Keratic precipitates (KPs)
KPs are proteinaceous cellular deposits occurring at the back of
cornea (corneal endothelial deposits). Keratic precipitates are
formed by the aggregation of polymorphonuclear cells, lymphocytes,
and epitheloid cells. In the setting of uveitis, the bimicrosopic
appearance of KP may yeild important diagnostic clues for the
identification of the underlying inflammatory disorder :?
Mutton fat KP :- Large, yellowish KPs, are characteristic
ofgranulomatous uveitis. These are composed of epitheloid cells and
macrophages. They are large, thick fluffy, lardaceous KPs, having a
greasy or waxy appearance.
Small or medium KPs (granular KPs):- These are composed of
lymphocytes and are characteristic of non- granulomatous uveitis.
These are small, round and whitish precipitates
Red KPs :- Composed of RBCs and inflammatory cells. These are
seen in hemorrhagic uveitis.
Old KPs :- In healed uveitis. The above described KPs shrink, fade,
become pigmented and irregular in shape with crenated margins.
1021. The zonules suspending the lens are
      attached to the?
 a) Root of iris

 b) Ciliary body

 c) Anterior vitreous

 d) Limbus



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Ciliary body
The ciliary zonules (Zonules of zinn or suspensory ligaments of lens)
hold the lens in position and enable the ciliary muscle to act on it.
These consist essentially of a series of fibres which run from the
ciliary body and fuse into the outer layer of the lens capsule around
the equatorial zone.
1022. Lens attached to ciliary body via ?
 a) Limbus

 b) Zonules

 c) Vitreous Humour

 d) Root of iris



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Zonules
1023. Cataract is caused by ?
 a) Hypoparathyroidism

 b) Cigrate smoking

 c) Non-ionizing radiation

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., All of the above
1024. All of the following are causes of
      posterior subcapsular cataract except -
 a) Myotonic dystrophy

 b) Wilson's Disease

 c) Ionizing radiation

 d) Congenital cataract



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Congenital cataract
Myotoic dystrophy
Wilson's disease
Atopic dermatitis
Corticosteroids
Trauma
Galactosemia
Infrared/heat cataract (glass-blower's or glass worker)
1025. The intraocular lens in cataract surgery
      is placed in ?
 a) Surface of iris

 b) Capsular bag

 c) Over the face of viterous

 d) Around the limbus



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Capsular bag
A saclike structure remaining within the eye following extracapsular
cataract extraction or Phacoemulsification.
The implanted intraocular lens is placed within this structure to
recreate the usual phakic state.
  1026. Non foldable lens is made of -
    a) Silicon

    b) Acrylic

    c) PMMA

    d) Hydrogel



   Correct Answer - C
   Ans. C. PMMA
   Types of IOL
   Depending on the material of manufacturing, following types of IOLs
   are there
1. Rigid IOLs:- Made entirely from polyrnethyl methacrylate (PMMA) .
2. Foldable IOLs:- Are used after phacoemulsification and are made of
   silicon, acrylic, hydrogel and collamer.
3. Rollable IOIs: Ultra-thin IOLs and are sued after phokonit technique
   (micro- incision: 1 mm).
   These are made of hydrogel.
1027. Rigid gas permeable lens are made of-
 a) Plymethymethacrylate

 b) Hydroxymethylmethacrylate

 c) Co polymer of PMMA, Silicon containing monomer & cellulose
    acetyl butyrate

 d) Cellulose acetae Butyrate



Correct Answer - C
1. Hard lenses:
Made of pokymethylmethacrylate (PMMA)
2. Rigid gas permeable (RGP) lenses:
Copolymer of PMMA, silicon containing vinyl monomer & cellulose
acetate butyrate (CAB) are used to manufacture RGP lenses.
3. Soft lenses:
These are made up of hydroxymethymethacrylate (HEMA)
1028. Axial length of eye ball is measured by
      ?
 a) A mode Ultrasonography

 b) B mode Ultrasonography

 c) M mode Ultrasonography

 d) Both a and b



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., A mode Ultrasonography
Ultrasonographv in Ophthalmology
A Mode
Transducer is coupled directly to the eye through the use of methyl
cellulose.
Recording are done in a graphic mode. Height of the recorded spike
on vertical axis is a measure of the amplitude of the echo, the
position of the spike along the horizontal axis indicates the arrival of
the echo on the tranducer.
Diagnosis is based on the basis of amplitude, position, extent and
movement of the abnormal echoes alonwith the sound attenuating
properties of the abnormality.
It has a special role in biometry i.e. axial length which is very
essential for surgical planning. B mode
The transducer is coupled to the eye by either the gel applied to the
closed lid or by a saline bath
Is is a display of two - dimensional cross sectional images.
The echoes in B scan are displayed as spots and the brightness of
echoes indicates its amplitude.
1029. Snowflake cataract is associated with:
      September 2008
 a) Hypertension

 b) Adult diabetes

 c) Trauma

 d) Juvenile diabetes



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D: Juvenile diabetes
Snowflake Cataracts: This type of cataract represents dots of
various sizes (and sometimes various colours) distributed
throughout the cortex surrounding the nucleus for 360°.
This is the most common cataract seen in Down Syndrome (extra
copy of chromosome 21 also called trisomy 21) and juvenile
diabetes mellitus.
These usually have very little effect on vision.
Adult diabetic cataract shows cortical and/or nuclear and/or
subcapsular (same as age related)
1030. What is the type of Galactosemia
      cataract?
 a) Snowflake

 b) Oil drop

 c) Blue dot

 d) Polychromatic lustre



Correct Answer - B
Ans, B. Oil drop
1031. Rosette cataract is seen due to:
 a) Trauma

 b) Copper foreign body

 c) Diabetes

 d) Hyperparathyroidism



Correct Answer - A
Ans. Trauma
1032. Vossius ring occurs in
 a) Lens dislocation

 b) Concussion injury

 c) Penetrating injury

 d) Extra capsular extraction



Correct Answer - B
B i.e. Concussion injury
1033. Most common etiolopathogenetic cause
      of glaucoma is:
      March 2012
 a) Raised pressure in episcleritic veins

 b) Decreased outflow

 c) Increased formation of aqueous humour

 d) Increased scleral outflow



Correct Answer - B
Ans: B i.e. Decreased outflow
A sustained increase in intraocular pressure may be due to
increased formation of the aqueous humour, difficulty in its exit, or a
raised pressure in the episcleral veins of these, the first & last rarely
occur, and it follows that raised intraocular pressure is essentially
due to an increased resistance to the circulation of the aqueous at
the pupil and/ or its drainage through the angle of the anterior
chamber.
1034. Feature (s) of Infantile glaucoma is/are
      except:
 a) Aniridia may be associated

 b) Treatment includes trabeculotomy

 c) Buphthalmos can occur

 d) Cornea is thin & clear

 e) May be associated with Sturge-weber syndrome



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Cornea is thin & clear
Answer- D. Cornea is thin & clear
Primary infantile glaucoma is a rare developmental defect in the
iridocorneal filtration angle of the anterior chamber that
prevents aqueous fluid from properly draining from the eye.
This obstruction increases the intraocular pressure, which, if
untreated, damages the optic nerve. Infantile glaucoma can
cause complete blindness if left untreated.
Glaucoma can also occur in infants after trauma or intraocular
surgery (eg, cataract extraction). Glaucoma associated with
another ocular disorder, such as aniridia, Lowe syndrome,
or Sturge-Weber syndrome, is called secondary glaucoma.
Buphthalmos (blue and thin sclera, streched limbus) is seen.
Treatment: Trabeculotomy, Goniotomy, combined
trabeculotomy and trabeculotomy +/- MMC(Mitomycin)
1035. What is not true about congenital
      glaucoma of eye?
a) Photophobia is most common symptom

b) Haab's Striae maybe seen

c) Thin and blue sclera seen

d) Anterior chamber is shallow



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Photophobia is most common symptom
1036. Descemet membrane breach is seen in
      ?
 a) Angle closure glaucoma

 b) Buphthalmos

 c) Acute Iridocyclitis

 d) Subconjunctival hemorrhage



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Buphthalmos
Haab striae are discrete corneal opacities appear as lines with
double contour due to rupture in Descemet's membrane.
1037. Earliest sign of primary congenital
      glaucoma ?
 a) Corneal edema with watering

 b) Haab's Striae

 c) Blue sclera

 d) Myopia



Correct Answer - A
Ans., A. Corneal edema with watering
Mostcommon symptom - Watering (lacrimation)
2d most common symptom - Photophobia
Most troublesome symptom - Photophobia (Child avoids light)
First sign - Corneal edema with watering
1038. Selective alpha 2 agoinst used in
      glaucoma ?
 a) Tirriolol

 b) Epinephrine

 c) Dipivefrine

 d) Brimonidine



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Brimonidine
1039. Latanoprost used topically in glaucoma
      primarily acts by?
 a) Decreasing aqueous humor formation

 b) Increasing uveoscleral outflow

 c) Releasing pupillary block

 d) Increasing trabecular outflow



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Increasing uveoscleral outflow
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Increasing uveoscleral outflow
Latanoprost is an analog of prostaglandin F2a that increases
uveoscleral outflow and induces miosis.
Antiglaucoma Drugs: Mechanism of Lowering Intraocular
Pressure (IOP):
Drugs that increase trabecular outflow
? Miotics (e.g., pilocarpine)
? Epinephrine, dipivefrine
? Bimatoprost
Drugs that increase uveoscleral outflow
? Prostaglandins (latanoprost)
? Epinephrine, dipivefrine
? Brimonidine
? Apraclonidine
Drugs that decrease aqueous production
? Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors (e.g., acetazolamide, dorzolamide)
? Alpha receptor stimulators in ciliary process (e.g., epinephrine,
dipivefrine, clonidine, brimonidine, apraclonidine)
? Beta-blockers
Hyperosmotic agents - (e.g., glycerol, mannitol, urea).
1040. Mioitcs are treatment of choice for ?
a) Angle closure glaucoma

b) Open angle glaucoma

c) Buphthalmos

d) Sympathetic Ophthalmia



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Angle closure glaucoma
1041. Which of the following drug is alpha 2
      agonist?
 a) Apraclonidine

 b) Timolol

 c) PG analogues

 d) Verampamil



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Apraclonidine
Apraclonidine – Selective alpha 2 agonist.
Useful in glaucoma.
Alpha agonists (Brimonidine and apraclonidine) are contraindicated
in hypertensive crisis.
Dipivefrin is a prodrug which is converted into epinephrine inside ttre
eyeUall, so can safely be used in hypertension.
1042.         What is the cause of glaucoma in
                      retinoblastoma?
 a) Blockge of trabecular network

 b) Neovascularisation

 c) Mass effect of the tumour

 d) Lysis of the lens



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Neovascularisation
Retinoblastoma is a cause of neovascular glaucoma,
1043. Glaucoma drainage devices ?
 a) Drain aqueous humour to the posterior segment

 b) Drain aqueous humour to an external device

 c) Open the trabeculae mechanically

 d) Reduce the aqueous secretion by compressing the ciliary
    epithelium



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Drain aqueous humour to an external device
Glaucoma drainage devices are designed to divert aqueous humor
from the anterior chamber to an external reservoir, where a fibrous
capsule forms about 4-6 weeks after surgery and regulates flow.
These devices have shown success in controlling intraocular
pressure (IOP) in eyes with previously failed trabeculectomy and in
eyes with insufficient conjunctiva because of scarring from prior
surgical procedures or injuries.
They also have shown success in complicated glaucomas, such as
uveiticglaucoma, neovascular glaucoma, and pediatric and
developmental glaucomas, among others.
1044. A 44 year old woman presents Sudden
      painless loss of vision with history of
      previous similar episode fundoscopy
      shows no glow. What could be the
      possible diagnosis?
 a) Vitreous Hemorrhage

 b) Rhegmatogenous Retinal Detachment

 c) Acute congestive glaucoma

 d) Fungal Keratitis



Correct Answer - A
Ans., A. Vitreous Hemorrhage
Vitreous hemorrhage refers to bleeding into the vitreous chamber or
a space created by vitreous detachment.
Patients present with sudden onset of floaters (black spots in front of
the eye)where the hemorrhage is small, and there may be sudden
painless loss ofvisionif the hemorrhage is large.
1045. All of the following are true for
      retinopathy of prematurity except:
 a) Occurs in premature infants due to late crying

 b) Due to hypoxia there occurs neovascularization followed by
    fibroproliferation

 c) End result is bilateral blindness

 d) Blindness can be prevented by early diagnosis and ablation of
    vascular premature retina with cryotherapy or photocoagulation



Correct Answer - A
Ans. Occurs in premature infants due to late crying
1046. Retinopathy of prematurity is
      commonly predisposed by-
 a) Less gestation age

 b) Low birth weight

 c) O2 toxicity


 d) Carbohydrate excess



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Less gestation age
1047. Eales disease is:
 a) Recurrent optic neuritis

 b) Recurrent pappilloedema

 c) Recurrent periphelbitis retinae

 d) None



Correct Answer - C
Ans. Recurrent periphelbitis retinae
1048. What is false about Eale's disease
      amongst the followwing?
 a) Retinal detachment may occur

 b) AKT is given

 c) Optic neuritis

 d) Vitreous Hemorrhage



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Optic neuritis
1049. Snowball appearance is seen in ?
a) Posterior uveitis

b) Sarcoidosis

c) Anterior uveitis

d) Vitreous Hemorrhage



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Sarcoidosis
Causes of intermediate uveitis, thus Snowball Opacities of
Vitreous –
Candidiasis
TB, syphilis
Sarcoidosis
Multiple sclerosis
Lyme disease.
1050. Prutchners retinopathy in associated
      with -
 a) Diabetes Mellitus

 b) Wilson's disease

 c) Head trauma

 d) Rheumatoid arthritis



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Head trauma
Purtscher’s retinopathy
Near-confluent cotton-wool spots clustered around an otherwise
normal optic nerve head in an eye of a patient who had sustained a
severe blunt injury to the head and chest.
Later, it was discovered to be associated with several non-traumatic
systemic diseases.
Conditions associated:
Severe head, chest & long bone diseases.
Fat embolism syndrome.
Amniotic fluid embolism
Actuepancreatitits.
SLE
1051. Subhyaloid hemorrhage is ?
 a) Boat shaped

 b) Crescent shaped

 c) Round

 d) Flame shaped



Correct Answer - A
Ans,. A. Boat shaped
Retrohyaloid (subhyaloid) hemorrhage ('Boat- shaped or scaphoid) :-
Located anterior (internal) to the retina, within the retrohyoid space.
(note - the term hyaloid refers to hyaloid body, another name for
vitreous humor).
1052. What is true about retinal hemorrhage
      in new born?
 a) More common in instrumented deliveries

 b) Resolve in 6 - 8 months

 c) Commonly unilateral

 d) Associated with intrauterine infection



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. More common in instrumented deliveries
Birth-rdated RH in infants occurs in one-quarter of normal deliveries
and are far more common after instrumental deliveries.
Commonly bilateral, they were predominantly intraretinal, posterior,
resolved rapidly, and very rarely persisted beyond 6 weeks.
1053. Most common age related change in
      vitreous ?
 a) Anterior vitreous detachment

 b) Posterior vitreous detachment

 c) Vitreous hemorrhage

 d) Vitritis



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Posterior vitreous detachment
Yanoff Writes (Most common age related event in vitreous is
posterior vitreous detachment'
1054. Muscae volitantes is seen in ?
 a) Vitreous detachment

 b) Vitreous Hemorrhage

 c) Remains of primitive hyaloid vasculatur

 d) Eale's disease



Correct Answer - C
Ans, C. Remains of primitive hyaloid vasculatur
Muscaevolitantes are physiological vitreous opacities and represent
the residues ofprimitivehyaloid vasculature.
1055. All are true regarding optic neuritis
      except:
 a) Decreased visual acuity

 b) Decreased pupillary reflex

 c) Abnormal electroretinogram

 d) Abnormal visual evoked response retinogram



Correct Answer - C
C i.e. Abnormal electroretinogram
Electroretinogram indicates the activity of retinal (esp. rods &
cones) function and has no role in assessing the functional integrity
of the optic nerve Q. So it can't be abnormal in optic neuritis.
   1056. Anisocoria in Horner's syndrome is due
         to
    a) Oculo sympathetic palsy

    b) Oculo parasympathetic palsy

    c) Oculomotor nerve palsy

    d) Abducens nerve palsy



   Correct Answer - A
   Answer- A. Oculo sympathetic palsy
   Anisocoria is a condition characterized by an unequal size of
   the eyes' pupils.
   It can be an entirely harmless condition or a symptom of more
   serious medical problems.
   Anisocoria has various causes:
   Physiological anisocoria: About 20% of normal people have a slight
   difference in pupil size which is known as physiological anisocoria.
   In this condition, the difference between pupils is usually less than
   1 mm.[3]
   Horner's syndrome
   Horner's syndrome is oculo sympathetic palsy.
   Horner's syndrome consists of classical triad of ipsilateral:-
1. Ptosis,
2. Miosis,
3. Anhydrosis (loss of sweating)
   Other features are :- Loss of cilio-spinal reflex, Enophthatnos,
   Heterochromia (ipsilateral iris is of light colour), the pupil is slow to
   dilate, slight elevation of inferior eyelid, normal pupillary reflex.
1057. The most common type of strabismus
              seen in myopes is?
 a) Intermittent Exotropia

 b) Intermittent Esotropia

 c) Esotropia hypotropia complex

 d) Exoptropia Hypotropia complex



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Intermittent Exotropia
Myopia and Intermittent exoptropia
Traditionally, it is believed that the presence of myopia may be
associated with a decreased demand for accommodation and hence
lower convergence.
This may predispose to an increased risk ofdeveloping exotropia
Alternately, it is hypothesized that intermittent exotropia may lead to
development of rnyopia due to increased accommodative demand
and increased convergence may be necessary to control the
exodeviation that can contribute to increased acommodation and
myopia in intermittent distance exotropia.
1058. Dalrymple's sign of ocular Graves'
      disease refers to:
 a) Retraction of the upper lid

 b) Lid lag

 c) Proptosis

 d) All of the above combinedly



Correct Answer - A
Ans. Retraction of the upper lid
1059. Macular sparing is associated with lesions in:
 a) Optic nerve

 b) Lateral geniculate body

 c) Occipital cortex

 d) Optic chiasma



Correct Answer - C
Macular sparing, that is, loss of peripheral vision with intact macular vision, is also
common with occipital lesions

Ref: Ganong's Review of Medical Physiology 23rd edition, Chapter 12.
1060.
Pupillary reflex pathway- All of the following
are a part except ?
 a) Edinger Westphal nucleus

 b) Pretectal nudes

 c) Medial geniculate body

 d) Retinal ganglion cell



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Medial geniculate body
Sensory efferent) component of light rfiex = Optic (1st) nerve
Motor (efferent) component of light reflex = Occulomotor (3rd) nerve
1061. Sixth cranial nerve palsy causes of left
      eye causes?
 a) Accomodation paresis in left gaze

 b) Ptosis of left eye

 c) Adduction weakness of left eye

 d) Diplopia in left gaze



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Diplopia in left gaze
Sixth nerve supplies lateral rectus, therefore its palsy results in
abduction weakness (not adduction weakness).
In left gaze, there is abduction ofleft eye and adduction ofright eye.
Ifthere is paralysis oflateral rectus of left eye (66 nerve paralysis),
abduction ofleft eye will not be possible in left gaze, while adduction
of right eye is normal.
Therefore, there will be diplopia in left gaze.
1062. D Shaped pupil is seen in ?
 a) Iridodialysis

 b) Iridodonesis

 c) Anterior Uveitis

 d) Anterior synechiae



Correct Answer - A
Ans., A. Iridodialysis
Iridodtalysis is detachment of lris from its root at the ciliary body.
It results in D shaped pupil and a black biconvex area seen at the
periphery.
1063. Best method of detection of retained
      glass intraocular foreign body is:
 a) CT scan

 b) Radiography

 c) Ultrasonography

 d) Tonography



Correct Answer - A
Ans. CT scan
1064. Pulsatile proptosis is a feature of ?
 a) Orbital varix

 b) Retinoblastoma

 c) Cortico-cavernous fistula

 d) Covernous sinus thrombosis



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Cortico-cavernous fistula
Proptosis
Proptosis is bulging of the eyeball (forward bulging) beyond the
orbital margins. Though the word exophthalmos is synonymous with
proptosis; some source define xophthalmos as a protrusion of globe
greater than 18mm and proptosis as a protrusion equal to or less
than 18 mm. Proptosis may be classified as follows : ?
Unilateral Proptosis Proptosis of one eye.
Inflammatory lesions :- Orbital cellulitis, abscess, cavernous sinus
thrombosis, etc.
Vascular disturbances :- Haemorrhage, varicose orbital veins,
haemangioma, etc.
Cysts and tumour :- Dermoid cyst, osteoma, lymphoma,
lymphosarcoma, glioma, meningioma of optic nerve, retinoblastoma
and metastatic deposits in orbit Neuroblastoma, breast, prostate,
lung, GIT, Kidney, Ewing's tumor, melanoma, wilms tumor
(Nephroblastoma)].
 Systemic diseases - Leukemias and endocrine disturbances such
as Graves' disease and thyrotropic exophthalmos in initial stages.
Paralysis of extraocular muscles as in complete ophthalmoplegia.
 Mucocele of PNS' - Frontal (most common), ethmoid, maxillary.
 Bilateral Proptosis Proptosis of both eyes.
evelopmental anomalies of the skull- Oxycephaly (tower skull).
Endocrine exophthalmos, both thyrotoxic and thyrotropic.
Inflammatory lesions - Cavernous sinus thrombosis.
Tumours - lymphosarcoma, lymphoma, pseudotumour,
nephroblastoma, Ewing's sarcoma.
 Systemic disease - Histocytosis (Hand - schuller christon disease),
amyloidosis, wegner's granulomatosis.
Intermittent proptosis
 Proptosis developing intermittently and rapidly in one eye when
venous stasis is induced by forward bending or lowering the head,
turning the head forcibly, hyperextension of the neck, coughing,
forced expiration with or without compression of the nostrils, or
pressure on jugular veins. The most important casue is orbital varix
(varicocele).
Pulsatile proptosis : - Pulsatile proptosis is seen in
caroticocovernous fistula; saccular aneurysm of ophthalmic artery;
and due to transmitted cerebral pulsation as seen in meningocele,
neurofibromatosis and traumatic or operative hiatus.
1065. In which of the following conditions
      Berlin's edema is
 a) Open angle glaucoma

 b) After cataract surgery

 c) After concussional trauma

 d) Diabetic retinopathy



Correct Answer - C
C i.e. After concussion trauma
Blunt trauma to eye may produce Berlin's edema or commotio
retinae Q which is a cloudy swelling characterized by a grey
appaerance, most frequently in the temporal region. It may also
manifest as cherry red spot in the foveal region.
   1066. All of the following are complications of
         traumatic hyphema except?
    a) Rebleeding

    b) Pupillary Block

    c) Corneal Ulcer

    d) Posterior synechiae



   Correct Answer - C
   Ans. C. Corneal Ulcer
   Complications of traumatic hyphema
1. Obstruction of trabecular meshwork with associated intraocular
   pressure elevation
2. Peripheral anterior synechiae (PAS)
3. Posterior synechiae
4. Cornealbloodstaining
5. Rebleeding: Can occur when the initial clot retracts and lyses
   allowing for a second episode ofbleeding. Rebleeds are generally
   more severe than the initial bleed, more likely to lead to glaucoma,
   corneal blood staining, and synechiae formation. It has been
   reported to occur 3.5% to 38% ofthe timeand probably 5-10%
   overall.
6. Pupillaryblock
7. Amblyopia (pediatric patients)
1067. All of the following drugs increase the
      risk of postoperative nausea and
      vomiting after squint surgery in
      children except ?
 a) Halothane

 b) Opiods

 c) Propofol

 d) Nitrous Oxide



Correct Answer - C
Ans, C. Propofol
Strabismus surgery on children is an independent risk factor for
postoperative nausea and vomiting.
Propofol Is Used In Predisposed Individuals As It Has
VeryLessEmetogenecity
1068. What is the most common eye lesion in
      HIV?
 a) Kaposi Sarcoma of Lid

 b) CMV Retinitis

 c) Cotton wool spots

 d) Choroiditis



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Cotton wool spots
The most common abnorrnal finding on fundoscopic examination is
cofton-wool spots.
1069. Features of Usher's Syndrome include
                   all except ?
 a) Night Blindness

 b) Visual Impairment

 c) Multiple Neurofibromas

 d) Hearing deficit



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Multiple Neurofibromas
Usher syndrome
Usher syndrome is a relatively rare genetic disorder caused by a
mutation in any one of at least I I genes resulting in a combination of
hearing loss and visual impairment, and is a leading cause of
deafblindness.
Usher syndrome is incurable at present.
Other names for Usher syndrome include Hallgren syndrome,
Usher-Hallgren syndrome, retinitis pigmentosadysacusissyndrome,
and dystrophia retinae dysacusis syndrome.
This syndrome is characterized by hearing loss and a gradual visual
impairment. The hearing loss is caused by a defective inner ear,
whereas the vision loss results from retinitis pigmentosa (RP), a
degeneration of the retinal cells.
Usually, the rod cells of the retina are affected first, leading to early
night blindness and the gradual loss of peripheral vision.
In other cases, early degeneration of the cone cells in the macula
occurs, leading to a loss of central acuity.
In some cases, the foveal vision is spared, leading to 'doughnut
vision"; central and peripheral vision are intact, but an annulus exists
around the central region in which vision is impaired.
1070. Pilocarpine is used in all of the
      following except:
      September 2006
 a) Primary, Open Angle Glaucoma

 b) Malignant Glaucoma

 c) Acute Angle Closure Glaucoma

 d) Chronic Synechial Angle Closure Glaucoma



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B: Malignant Glaucoma
Management of angle-closure secondary to ciliochoroidal
effusion is directed at two processes:
The first is uveal inflammation, which is treated with oral steroids to
reduce the effusion and allow the chamber to deepen spontaneously
as the inflammation subsides.
The second is anterior rotation of the lens-iris diaphragm, which is
reversed with cycloplegics. The pressure is treated in the acute
setting with aqueous suppressants and oral carbonic anhydrase
inhibitors. Pilocarpine is contraindicated because it will cause
anterior rotation of the lens-iris diaphragm.
1071. CHARGE syndrome includes all except
      ?
 a) Eye Coloboma

 b) Congenital heart disease

 c) Urinary tract defects

 d) Esophageal Atresia



Correct Answer - D
Ans, D. Esophageal Atresia
CHARGE SYNDROME
C - Coloboma of the eye, central nervous system anomalies.
H-Heartdefects.
A - Atresia ofthechoanae.
R - Retardation of growth and/or development.
G - Genital and/or urinary defects (Hypogonadism, undescended
testicles, besides hypospadias).
E - Ear anomalies and/or deafrress and abnormally bowl-shaped
and concave ears, known as 'lop ears".
1072. Parasitosis of extraocular eye muscles
      is seen in?
 a) Trichinosis

 b) Cysticercosis

 c) Amoebiasis

 d) Ascariasis



Correct Answer - A
Ans, A. Trichinosis
'Although many parasites can theoretically involve the extraocular
muscle the most frequent form of parasitic infestation of extraocular
muscles is trichinosis'
1073. The principle of total internal reflection
      is used by?
 a) Gonioscope

 b) Pachymeter

 c) Ophthalmoscope

 d) Lensometer



Correct Answer - A

Ans. A
Gonioscopy is an essential diagnostic tool and examination
technique used to visualize the structures of the anterior chamber
angle.
Mastering the various techniques of gonioscopy is crucial in the
evaluation of glaucoma patients.
 Gonioscopy is required to visualize the chamber angle because
under normal conditions light reflected from the angle structures
undergoes total internal reflection at the tear–air interface. At the
tear–air interface, the critical angle (approximately 46°) is reached
and light is totally reflected back into the corneal stroma. This
prevents direct visualization of the angle structures. All gonioscopy
lenses eliminate the tear–air interface by placing a plastic or glass
surface adjacent to the front surface of the eye. The small space
between the lens and cornea is filled by the patient’s tears, saline
solution, or a clear viscous substance. Depending on the type of
lens
1074.          Immediate treatment of acute
                   dacryocystitis is?
a) Antibiotics and drainage of abscesss if present

b) Dacryocystorhinostomy

c) Dacryocystectomy

d) Nasal decongestants



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Antibiotics and drainage of abscesss if present
1075. Which of the following is the common
      cause of respiratory failure type 2 ?
 a) Chronic bronchitis exacerbation

 b) Acute attack asthma

 c) ARDS

 d) Pneumonia



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Chronic bronchitis exacerbation
Type II respiratory failure occurs due to alveolar hypoventilation
1076. Aspirin-sensitive asthma is associated
      with:
 a) Obesity

 b) Urticaria

 c) Nasal polyp

 d) Extrinsic asthma



Correct Answer - C
The answer is C (Nasal polyp):
`Aspirin associated Asthma usually begins with perennial vasomotor
rhinitis that is followed by hyperplastic rhinosinusitis with nasal
polyps' — Harrisons
Aspirin associated Asthma:
Primarily affects adults, although the condition may occur in
childhood.
Usually begins with perennial vasomotor rhinitis that is followed by
hyperplastic rhinosinusitis with nasal polyps.
Progressive asthma then appears.
On exposure to even very small quantities of aspirin, affected
individuals typically develop ocular and nasal congestion and acute,
often severe episodes of airways obstruction.
Death may follow ingestion of aspirin.
1077. Which of the following is seen in
      sarcoidosis
 a) Hypercalcemia

 b) Hypocalcemia

 c) Hyperphosphatemia

 d) Hypophosphatemia



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Hypercalcemia
Granuloma of sarcoidosis can secret 1-25 (OH)2 vitamin D.
Therefore, patients of sarcoidosis may develop hypercalcemia.
1078. Central bronchiectasis is seen with
 a) Cystic Adenomatoid Malformation

 b) Cystic fibrosis

 c) Broncho carcinoma

 d) Tuberculosis



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is'b' i.e., Cystic fibrosis
The distribution ()I. bronchiectasis mar be important diagnostically
A central                                          →       Perihilar
allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis.
Predominant upper lobe o Middle and lower lobe →               Cystic
fibrosis or one of its variants. Distribution is consistent with PCD
Lower lobe involvement is → Middle lobe and lingular segment of
the LUL involvement is characteristic of non tuberculous
mycobacteria (NTM). Idiopathic bronchiectasis
1079. Bronchiectasis Sicca is seen with
 a) Tuberculosis

 b) Pertussis

 c) Cystic fibrosis

 d) Kartagener syndrome



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Tuberculosis
Bronchiectasis Sicca or Dry Bronchiectasis is typically
associated with Tuberculosis.
Tuberculosis is associted with a type of dry bronchiectasis called
Bronchiectasis Sicca, which is predominantly seen in upper lobes.
Dry Bronchiectasis (Bronchiectasis Sicca) is typically characterized
by absence of copious amount of sputum which is usually a hall
mark of bronchiectasis.
Dry cough associated with hemoptysis is the typical presentation
Endobronchial tuberculosis commonly leads to bronchiectasis, either
from bronchial stenosis or secondary traction from fibrosis. Traction
bronchiectasis characteristically affects peripheral bronchi (which
lack cartilage support) in areas of end-stage fibrosis
1080. In a patient with COPD, best
      management option is
 a) Quit smoking

 b) Bronchodilators

 c) Low flow oxygen

 d) Mucolytics



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Low flow oxygen
Therapy is started with short-acting bronchodilator (beta-agonist or
anticholinergic).
Long-term oxygen therapy is used in all patients with COPD who
have chronic hypoxemia
1081. In a patient there is dyspnea in upright
      position which is relieved in supine
      position, Diagnosis ?
 a) Tachypnea

 b) Orthopnea

 c) Paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea

 d) Platypnea



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Platypnea
Platyapnea (Orthodeoxia)
Dyspnoea when a patient moves to sitting or standing position from
a recumbent position.
1082. Most common cause of idiopathic
      interstitial pneumonia is
 a) Sarcoidosis

 b) Organizing pneumonia

 c) Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis

 d) Lipoid pneumonia



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis
Idiopatic pulmonary fibrosis
Idiopathic nonspecific interstitial pneumonia
1083. Clicking noise in Pneumomediastinum
      is known as
 a) Hamman sign

 b) Trail sign

 c) Kussmaul sign

 d) None



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Hamman sign
Crunching or clicking noise heard synchronously with the heart beat
on auscultation and best heard in the left lateral decubitus position. It
is associated with "Pneumomediastinum".
1084. Emphysema presents with all except
a) Cyanosis

b) Barrel shaped chest

c) Associated with smoking

d) Type I respiratory failure



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Cyanosis
Dyspnoea
Cough or wheezing (some patient)
Weight loss
Barrel-Chest
FEVC and FEV1 are reduced. TLC, RC, and FRC are increased due
to hyperinflation.
Cyanosis is rare (in contrast to chronic bronchitis)
Emphysema (COPD) causes type-1 respiratory failure
1085. All are seen in emphysema except
a) Decreased vital capacity

b) Hyperinflation

c) Rhonchi

d) Reduced Dlco



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Rhonchi
Cough or wheezing (some patient)
Weight loss
Barrel-Chest
FEVC and FEV1 are reduced. TLC, RC and FRC are increased due
to hyperinfcation.
Cyanosis is rare (in contrast to chronic bronchitis)
Emphysema (COPD) causes type-1 respiratory failure
1086. Most common cause of pleural effusion
      in AIDS patients
 a) Kaposi sarcoma

 b) TB

 c) Pneumocystis Jiroveci

 d) Mycoplasma



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Kaposi sarcoma
Ophthalmological diseases
The most common abnormal findings on fundoscopic examination
are cotton wool spots.
CMV retinitis is the most severe ocular complication and occurs
when CD4 T-cells count is less than 50/ml. It typical presents as
perivascular hemorrhage and exudae with Cottage-Cheese
appearance.
Acute retinal necrosis syndrome, also called progressive outer
retinal necrosis (PORN) is caused by HSV and VZV
Other manifestations are chorioretinitis by toxoplasma and P carinii,
kaposi sarcoma of eyelid, and lymphoma.
1087. Most common cause of lung abscess is
      comatose patient
 a) Staph aureus

 b) Oral anaerobes

 c) Klebsiella

 d) Tuberculosis



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Oral anaerobes
Most lung abscesses in moribund intubated patients are due to
anaerobic bacteria, like peptostreptococcus, Bacteroides etc. Lung
abscess
The term pulmonary abscess describes a local suppurative process
within the lung, characterized by necrosis of lung tissues
Etiology
As aspiration of oropharyngeal secretions is the most common
cause, organisms most commonly causing lung abscess are those
normally found in oral cavity, i.e., Anaerobic bacteria (Bacteroides,
Fusobacterium, peptococcus species). Other organisms are S.
aureus, Klebsiella, Nocardia and gram negative bacteria.
1088. If a person is having ventriular
      tachycardia, extra systoles appears to
 a) P wave

 b) QRS complex

 c) T wave

 d) R wave



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. QRS complex
Extra systole in ventricular tachycardia appears in QRS complex
when an irritable focus in any part of the ventricular myocardium
activates the ventricles before the arrival of the next normal wave of
depolarisation from the atria a ventricular extrasystole is produced.
1089. Most common arrhythmia in ICU
      patients -
 a) Atrial flutter

 b) Atrial fibrillation

 c) PSVT

 d) NPAT



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Atrial fibrillation
Most common arrhythmia in I.C.U. patient → Atrial fibrillation
Most common arrhythmia in a patient with Cardiac arrest →
Ventricular fibrillation
1090. Most common mechanism of
      arrhythmia
 a) Re-entry

 b) Early after depolarization

 c) Late after depolarization

 d) Automaticity



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Re-entry
The most common arrhythmia mechanism is re-entry.
Fundamentally, re-entry is defined as the circulation of an activation
wave around an inexcitable obstacle.
Re-entry appears to be the basis for most abnormal sustained Supra
Ventricular Tachycardias (SVTs) and Ventricular tachycardia.
Examples of re-entry are:-
Polymorphic Ventricular tachycardia in patients with a genetically
determined ion channel abnormality such as the Brugada syndrome,
catecholaminergic polymorphic Ventricular tachycardia.
1091. Patient of 1st degree heart block
      complains of dizziness. Best treatment
      for this patient is
 a) Atropine

 b) Isoprenaline

 c) Adrenaline

 d) Pacemaker



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Pacemaker
The most definitive or reliable treatment for patient with symptomatic
A. V. conduction system is temporary or permanent pacing.
1092. All are used for secondary prevention
      of MI except
 a) Aspirin

 b) Statins

 c) Beta blockers

 d) Warfarin



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Warfarin
Medicines used in the secondary prevention of M.I.
Long term dual antiplatelet therapy with aspirin and P2Y12 receptor
blocker.
Statins (high intensity).
Angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors in patient with diabetes
heart failure, left ventricular ejection fraction.
f3 blockers.
1093. Not recommended in coronary artery
      disease patients
 a) Daily exercise

 b) Potassium

 c) Vitamin-E

 d) Statins



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Vitamin-E
Intervention studies using vitamin E to prevent cardiovascular
disease or cancer have not shown efficacy
1094. Digitalis is used in mitral stenosis when
      patient develops
 a) Atrial fibrillation

 b) Right ventricular failure

 c) Acute pulmonary edema

 d) Myocarditis



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Atrial fibrillation
Drugs useful in slowing the ventricular rate of patients with AF
Beta blockers,
Nondihydropyridine calcium channel blockers (e.g., verapamil or
diltiazem), and
Digitalis glycosides
1095. Which one of the following is not an
      early complication of acute myocardial
      infarction ?
 a) Papillary muscle dysfunction

 b) Ventricular septal defect

 c) Paricarditis

 d) Dressler's syndrome



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Dressler's syndrome
Dressler's syndrome is a late complication of myocardial infarction. It
usually occurs 1-8 weeks after myocardial infarctions
1096. Most common malignant tumor of heart
      in adults
 a) Sarcoma

 b) Rhabdomyoma

 c) Lipoma

 d) Paraganglioma



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Sarcoma
Almost all primary cardiac malignancies are sarcomas.
1097. Which is the best way to differentiate
      between stable angina and NSTEMI?
 a) ECG

 b) Cardiac-biomarker

 c) Trans thoracic Echocardiography

 d) Multi uptake gated Acquisition scan



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Cardiac-biomarker
The differentiating feature between Angina and MI is the elevation of
cardiac markers°.(no elevation is seen in Angina)
1098. Aetiology of Dressler Syndrome is
 a) Viral

 b) Autoimmune

 c) Idiopathic

 d) Toxin mediated



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Autoimmune
Immunological factors are thoughts to be of primary importance.
The immune complexes hat are generated are deposited into the
pericardium, pleura and lungs.
1099. Predisposing factors for coronary
      artery disease include, all Except:
 a) Homocysteinemia

 b) ↑ Lipoprotein B

 c) ↑ Fibrinogen

 d) ↑ plasminogen activator inhibitors 1



Correct Answer - B
Answer is B (↑. Lipoprotein B)
Predisposing factors for coronary artery disease include an
increased lipoprotein 'a' and not lipoprotein '6'.
1100. Murmur heard in aortic stenosis
 a) Right 2nd intercistal, low pitch murmur

 b) Apex, low pitch murmur

 c) Left Sternal area, low pitch murmur

 d) Pen-systolic murmur, high pitch murmur



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Right 2nd intercistal, low pitch murmur
Typically heard at the base of the heart in Aortic area (second
intercostal space).
Harsh quality.
Generally begins after Si and end S before S2.
1101. Which of the following statements
      about atrial myxomas is true
 a) Most common in Left Atrium

 b) More common in Males

 c) Distant metastasis are seen

 d) Most myxomas are familial



Correct Answer - A
Answer is A (Most common in Left Atrium)
Cardiac Myxomas are usually located in the atria, most common in
the left.
Cardiac myxomas
Are the most common type of primary cardiac tumorsQ
Occur at all ages and show no sex preference (mixes equally with
both sexes)Q
Most cardiac myxomas are sporadic, while some may be familial
Sporadic myxomas :
Are solitary Q
Located in Atria, most commonly in the left Q
Unlikely to have post-op recurrence e
Occur in younger individuals Q
Familial myxomas :
Are multiple °
More likely to have post op recurrence e
Myxomas are benign tumors and therefore distant metastasis are
not seen.?
1102. Duroziez's sign is seen in
 a) Aortic Regurgitation

 b) Tricuspid RegurgitationMitral stenosis

 c) Pericardial effusion

 d) None



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Aortic Regurgitation
In severe aortic regurgitation, gradual pressure over the femoral
artery leads to a systolic and diastolic bruit.
Refers to systolic and distolic murmurs heard over the femoral artery
while partially compresslng the vessel with the diaphragm of the
stethoscope.
1103. Becks triad is seen in
 a) Constrictive pericarditis

 b) Restrictive cardiomyopathy

 c) Cardiac tamponade

 d) None of the above



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Cardiac tamponade
Beck's triad is characteristic of cardiac Tamponade, it includes
:
Increased venous pressure
Decreased arterial pressure
Muffled heart sounds, silent heart (due to presence of fluid in
pericardium).
1104. The severity of mitral stenosis can be
      judged by-
 a) Intensity of murmur

 b) Duration of murmur

 c) Left ventricular S3

 d) Loud S1



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Duration of murmur
Duration depends on severity of MS.
In severe MS, the mid diastolic murmur is long and merges with the
presystolic murmur to produce holodiastolic murmur..
1105. Wide pulse pressure is seen in all
      except:
 a) PDA

 b) Aortic stenosis

 c) Aortic Regurgitation

 d) A.V. malformation



Correct Answer - B
Answer is B (Aortic Stenosis)
Aortic Stenosis is associated with a narrow pulse pressure.
Patent Ductus Arteriosus (PDA), Aortic Regurgitation and AV
Malformations (Arteriovenous shunting) are all associated with a
wide pulse pressure.
1106. All are true for transplanted kidney
      except
 a) Humoral antibody responsible for rejection

 b) CMI is responsible for rejection

 c) Previous blood transfusion

 d) HLA identity similarity seen in 1:100 people



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. HLA identity similarity seen in 1:100 people
Within any particular family, sibling's have a 7:4 chance of being
HLA identical. In contrast among unrelated
people, the probabilities of HLA identity in several thousand
depending upon phenotype involved' It is due to the fact that
HLA complex is inherited intact as two haplotypes.
1107. All are seen in Nephrotic syndrome
      except
 a) Atherosclerosis

 b) Thrombo-embolism

 c) Increased protein C levels

 d) Lipiduria



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Increased protein C levels
Nephrotic syndrome is a clinical complex characterized by a number
of renal and extrarenal features, most prominent of which are
Proteinuria (in practice > 3.0 to 3.5gm/24hrs),
Hypoalbuminemia, Edema
Hypertension
Hyperlipidemia, Lipiduria
Hypercoagulabilty(result of Loss of Antithrombin III)
1108. Basket weave appearance of glomerular
      basement membrane on electron
      microscopy is seen in
 a) Alport syndrome

 b) Acute post stretptococcal GN

 c) Polyarteritis nodosa

 d) Giant cell arteritis



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Alport syndrome
Basketweave appearance of glomerular basement membrane on
Electron Microscopy is seen in Alport's syndrome.
In Alport's Syndrome, the glomerular basement membrane shows
irregular thinning and thickening with a lamellated basket-weave
appearance in the thickened area due to extensive remodeling and
injury of the basement membrane.
1109. All of the following causes acute renal
      failure except
 a) Pyelonephritis

 b) Snakebite

 c) Rhabdomyolysis

 d) Analgesic nephropathy



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Analgesic nephropathy
Analgesic nephropathy causes chronic interstitial nephritis and
presents with chronic kidney disease.
AKI is a serious complication of snakebites by the viperidae family
1110. Features of Hepatorenal syndrome are
 a) Urine sodium < 10 meq/1

 b) Normal renal histology

 c) Renal function abnormal even after liver become normal

 d) a and b



Correct Answer - D
Answer is A & B (urine Na < 10 meq/l and Normal Renal
Histology)
Hepatorenal syndrome is associated with normal renal histology and
supported by a urine sodium excretion l0meq/L
Hepatorenal syndrome
Hepatorenal syndrome is defined as a state of functional renal
failure (Reduced GFR) in patients with severe liver disease
Structurally /Histologically the kidneys are normal and recover
function after successful liver transplantation.
The pathogenetic hallmark of hepatorenal syndrome is intense renal
vasoconstriction with coexistent systemic vasodilatation
The diagnosis of hepatorenal syndrome is considered in accordance
with the following diagnostic criteria.
Diagnostic of Hepatorenal Syndrome
Major criteria
Low glomerular filtration rate. as indicated by serum creatinine > 1.5
mg/dL or 24-hr creatinine clearance < 40 mL/min
Absence of shock, ongoing bacterial infection, fluid losses, and
current treatment with nephrotoxic drugs
No sustained improvement in renal function (decrease in serum
creatinine to 1.5 nig/dL or increase in creatinine clearance to 40
mL/min) after diuretic withdrawal and expansion of plasma volume
with 1.5L of a plasma expander
Proteinuria mg/d1, and no uhrasonographic evidence of obstructive
uropathy or parenchymal renal disease Additional criteria
Urine volume < 500 mL/d
Urine sodium < 10 meq/L
Urine osmolality greater than plasma osmolality
Urine red blood cells <50/high- power. field
Serum sodium concentration < 130 niEqL
Note: All major criteria must be present for the diagnosis of
hepatorenal syndrome.
Additional criteria are not necessary for the diagnosis but provide
supportive evidence.
1111. All are true about GFR except
a) 30-40% decrease after 70 years of age

b) Best estimated by creatinine clearance

c) C.K.D is defied as GFR < 30 ml/min/1.732 for 4 weeks

d) GFR is dependent on height in children



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. C.K.D is defied as GFR < 30 ml/min/1.732 for 4
weeks
1112. Dialysis indications
 a) Hypertension

 b) Hypokalemia

 c) Pericarditis

 d) Metabolic alkalosis



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Pericarditis
Indications of dialysis in chronic renal failure
Pericarditis or pleuritis (urgent indication).
Progressive uremic encephalopathy or neuropathy, with signs such
as confusion, asterixis, myoclonus, wrist or foot drop, or,in severe
cases, seizures (urgent indication).
A clinically significant bleeding diathesis attributable to uremia
(urgent indication).
Persistent metabolic disturbances that are refractory to medical
therapy;these include hyperkalemia, metabolic acidosis,
hypercalcemia, hypocalcemia, and hyperphosphatemia.
Fluid overload refractory to diuretics.
Hypertension poorly responsive to antihypertensive medications.
Persistent nausea and vomiting.
Evidence of malnutrition.
1113. Polyuria with low fixed specific gravity
      urine is seen in ?
 a) Diabetes mellitus

 b) Diabetes insipidus

 c) Chronic glomerulonephritis

 d) Potomania



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Chronic glomerulonephritis
Polyuria with fixed low specific gravity is a feature of chronic glomerulonephritis.
Specific gravity measures the kidney's ability to concentrate or dilute urine about plasma.
Because urine is a solution of minerals, salts, and compounds dissolved in water, the
specific gravity is greater than 1.000. The more concentrated the urine, the higher the urine
specific gravity.
An adult's kidneys have a remarkable ability to concentrate or dilute urine.
In infants, the range for specific gravity is less because immature kidneys are not able to
concentrate urine as effectively as mature kidneys.
A low specific gravity occurs in three situations.
In diabetes insipidus, there is an absence or decrease of anti-diuretic hormone. Without
anti-diuretic hormone, the kidneys produce an excessive amount of urine, often up to 15 to
20 liters per day with low specific gravity.
Glomerulonephritis and pyelonephritis cause decreased urine volume and low specific
gravity. In these diseases, damage to the kidney's tubules affects the ability of the kidney to
re-absorb water. As a result, the urine remains to dilute.
The third reason for low specific gravity is renal failure, which results in a fixed specific
gravity between 1.007 and 1.010. In renal failure, the remaining functional nephrons
undergo compensatory structural and hypertrophic changes. These compensatory changes
result in urine that is almost isotonic with plasma. Therefore, a patient experiencing renal
failure will present with specimens measuring the same, or fixed, specific gravity regardless
of water intake.
1114. Which of the following microorganism
      is incriminated in infection after
      hemodialysis
 a) Chlamydia

 b) Gram positive organisms

 c) Gram negative

 d) Anaerobes



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Gram positive organisms
Hemo-dialysis catheter-related bloodstream infections (CRBSIs) are
a major complication of long-term catheter us in HD. Gram positive
organism are seen followed by gram negative organisms.
1115. Disease, does not recur in the kidney
      after renal transplant is :
 a) Alport syndrome

 b) Amyloidosis

 c) Good Pasteur's syndrome

 d) Diabetic nephropathy



Correct Answer - A
Answer is A (Alport's syndrome):
Alport is syndrome has not been mentioned to recur in kidney after a
renal tansplant.
1116. Low serum copper due to ATP 7A gene
      is due to?
 a) Dubin-johnson's syndrome

 b) Wilson disease

 c) Menke disease

 d) Gilbert's disease



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Menke disease
Menke's disease, also known as kinky hair disease, is an X-linked
neurodegenerative disease of impaired copper transport, due to ATP
7A gene located on Xp12-13.
1117. Significant weight loss is defined as:
 a) 5% weight loss in 1-2 months

 b) 5% weight loss in 2-3 months

 c) 10% weight loss in 1-2 months

 d) 10% weight loss in 2-3 months



Correct Answer - A
Answer is A (5% weight loss in 1-2 months):
Significant weight loss is defined as 5% weight loss in I month.
Percent weight change over a period of time is calculated using
the person's current body weight and person's usual body weight.
Usual weight — Current weight Percent weight change = Usual
weight
1118. Hepatic Encephalopathy is predisposed
      by all, Except:
 a) Hyperkalemia

 b) Dehydration

 c) Constipation

 d) GI Bleeding



Correct Answer - A
Answer is A (Hyperkalemia):
Hepatic Encephalopathy is predisposed by Hypokalemia and not by
Hyperkalemia
  1119. Which is not true about alcoholic
        hepatitis :
    a) Gamma glutamyl transferase is raised

    b) SGPT is raised > SGOT

    c) SGOT is raised > SGPT

    d) Alkaline phosphatase is raised



   Correct Answer - B
   Answer is B
   SGOT/SGPT ratio greater than 2 is highly suggestive of alcoholic
   hepatitis and cirrhosis.
   AST is synonymous with SGOT & ALT is synonymous with SGPT
   In general AST and ALT levels rise parallel to each other. In
   alcoholic liver disease the AST rises out of proportion to ALT such
   that the ratio of AST and ALT may become greater than 2:
   Stigmata of Alcoholic hepatitis / cirrhosis that aid in diagnosis :
1. Bilateral enlarged parotids Q.
2. GynaecomastiaQ
3. Testicular atrophy with loss of body hairQ
4. Wasting of muscle massQ
5. Duputyrens contractureQ
   AST (SGOT) out of proportion to ALT (SGPT) seen in Q
1. Alcoholic hepatitis Q
2. Fatty liver in pregnancy Q
   Gamma Glutamyl transferase levels correlate with levels of
   Alkaline phosphatase and are a sensitive indicater of biliary tract
   disease — obstructive jaundice. It is not an indicator of alcoholic
   liver disease.
Remember :GGT is the most sensitive indicator of bilian, tract
disease
1120. Rockall score is used for prognosis of
      patients of
a) Upper GI bleeding

b) Lower GI bleeding

c) Hepatic encephalopathy

d) IBD



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Upper GI bleeding
1121. Which is a hormone dependent liver
      tumor ?
a) Adenoma

b) Hemangioma

c) Hepatocellular carcinoma

d) Hemangiopericytoma



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Adenoma
Adenomas are associated with contraceptive hormone use.
1122. Which of the following is not true
      regarding amoebic liver abscess
 a) Multiple abscesses is more common

 b) May rupture into the pleural cavity

 c) For asymptomatic luminal carriers diloxanide furoate is the drug
    of choice

 d) Mostly involving the right lobe of liver



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Multiple abscesses are more common
Amoebic liver abscess is the most common extra-
intestinal manifestation of amoebiasis.
It is the involvement of liver tissue by trophozoites of the organism
Entamoeba histolytica and of its abscess due to necrosis.
Most common in the posterosuperior surface of the right lobe.
Usually, there is one large solitary abscess.-
The necrotic contents of liver abscess are classically
described as anchovy-sauce pus.
Pleuropulmonary involvement of the most frequent complication of
amoebic liver abscess.
ALA is usually solitary and pyogenic liver abscess is usually multiple.
Multiple ALA, although rare, are frequently confused with pyogenic
liver abscess.
However, Tayal et al., from India showed that the existence of
multiple ALA is not uncommon as previously thought and
superinfection or co-infection with pyogenic organisms is common in
such cases.
Treatment
Treatment depends on the type of infection:
1) Asymptomatic carrier --> Luminal agents (Iodoquinol,
Paromomycine) --> Diloxanide furoate is the DOC.
2) Acute colitis(dysentery) --> Metronidazole or
Tinidazole + Luminal agent.
3) Liver abscess --> Metronidazole or Tinidazole or Ornidazole
+ Luminal agent.
1123. Poikilocytosis and anisocytosis is seen
      in
 a) Megaloblastic anaemia

 b) Iron deficiency anaemia

 c) Nutritional deficiency anaemia

 d) Thalassemia



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Iron deficiency anaemia
Anisocytosis means that RBC's are unequal in size indicating that
some of the RBC's are either too big or too small.
Poikilocytosis means that some of the RBC's are abnormally
shaped.
1124. All of the following are characteristic
      features of treatment of iron deficiency
      anemia with oral iron supplements,
      except
 a) Bioavailability is enhanced with vitamin C

 b) The proportion of iron absorbed reduces as hemoglobin
    improves

 c) The reticulocyte count should begin to increase in two weeks
    and peak in 4 weeks this suggests good response to treatment

 d) The treatment should be discontinued immediately once
    hemoglobin normalizes to prevent side effects of iron



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. The treatment should be discontinued immediately
once hemoglobin normalizes to prevent side effects of iron
The reticulocyte count begin to increase within 4-7 days after
initiation of therapy and peak at 1.5 weeks.
Typically for iron replacement therapy, up to 200mg of elemental
iron per day is given, usually as three or four iron tablets (each
containing 50-65mg elemental iron) given over the course of the
day.
A dose of 200 mg of elemental iron per day should result in
absorption of iron upto 50 mg/day. This supports a red cell
production level of 2-3 times normal in an individual with a normally
functioning marrow and appropriate erythropoietin stimulus.
As the hemoglobin level rise, erythropoietin stimulation decreases,
and the amount of iron absorbed is reduced.
The goal of therapy in individuals with iron-deficiency anemia is not
only to repair the anemia, but also to provide stores of at least 0-5-1
only to repair the anemia, but also to provide stores of at least 0-5-1
g of iron.
This sustained treatment for a period of 6-12 months after correction
of the anemia will be necessary.
1125. Which of the following is not expected
      in a case of Microcytic Hypochromic
      anemia
 a) Reduced serum Iron

 b) Reduced total RBC distribution width

 c) Normal Ferritin levels

 d) Increased TIBC



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Reduced total RBC distribution width
The first change in iron deficiency anemia is decreased in iron store,
which is manifested as decreased serum ferritin level.
Bone marrow iron decreases earlier than serum iron.
There is microcytic hypochromic anemia (microcytosis precedes
hypochromia).
1126. Zieve syndrome is characterized by all
      except
 a) Alcohol abuse

 b) Hemolysis

 c) Hypertriglyceridemia

 d) Pancreatic lipase deficiency



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Pancreatic lipase deficiency
Zieve's syndrome is an acute metabolic condition that can occur
during withdrawal from prolonged alcohol abuse
Zieve syndrome is a rare condition characterized by hemolytic
anemia in conjunction with secondary hyperlipidemia in patients
suffering from alcohol-related toxic liver damage.
1127. Hemoglobin with zeta 2 and gamma 2
      chains are seen in which of the
      following
a) Gower I

b) Gower II

c) Portland

d) Fetal Gb



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Portland
Hb Gower I → Zeta 2 / epsilon 2
Hb Portland → Zeta 2 /gamma 2
Hb Gower H Alpha 2 / epsilon 2
1128. HAM test is based upon :
 a) GPI Anchor Proteins

 b) Complement

 c) Spectrin protein

 d) Mannose binding proteins



Correct Answer - B
Answer is B (Complements)
HAM test is based upon susceptibility of RBC's to complement
mediated lysis in patients with PNH.
HAM test is usedfbr the diagnosis of PNH (Paroxysmal Nocturnal
Haemoglobinuria). HAM test (Acidified serum lysis test)
demonstrates lysis of RBC after activation of complement by acid. In
acidified serum complement is activated by the alternate pathway. In
patients with PNH, RBC are unusually susceptible to complement,
and undergo lysis when incubated with acidified fresh serum.
1129. All of the following are major complications of massive transfusion,
      except:

 a) Hypokalemia

 b) Hypothermia

 c) Hypomagnesemia

 d) Hypocalcemia



Correct Answer - A
Ans:A.)Hypokalemia.


Complications usually seen with massive blood transfusion are

1) hyperkalemia,
2) hypocalcemia,
3)hypomagnesemia
4) hyperammonemia,
5) hypothermia,
6) Acidosis
7)dilutional coagulopathies and DIC (most worrisome problem after
massive transfusion and is the usual cause of death after massive
blood transfusion) and
8) ARDS.

The lethal triad of acidosis, hypothermia, and coagulopathy
associated with MT is associated with a high mortality rate.
1130. All are true about CNS leukemia
      except
 a) CNS irradiation is given

 b) Intrathecal methotrexate is given

 c) Seen with acute myeloid leukemia

 d) Single blast in CSF is sufficient for diagnosis



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Seen with acute myeloid leukemia
Most children with leukemia have subclinical CNS involvement at the
time of diagnosis.
Few children show central nervous system involvement at the time
of diagnosis, most are asymptomatic but some have features of
raised intracranial tension.
CNS involvement is mostly due to ALL. CNS involvement is more
common in ALL than AML.
1131. The tissue of origin of the Kaposi's
      sarcoma is ?
 a) Lymphoid

 b) Vascular

 c) Neural

 d) Muscular



Correct Answer - B
Ans is 'b' i.e., Vascular
Kaposi Sarcoma
Kaposi sarcoma is an intermediate grade, multicentric vascular,
tumour
* The pathogenesis of kaposi sarcoma is complex, fundamentally it
is an angioproliferative disease that is not a true neoplastic sarcoma.
It is a manifestation of excessive proliferation of spindle cells that are
believed to be of vascular origin and have features in common with
endothelial and smooth muscle cells.
* Grossly-Three stages of the disease can be identified
        Patch (1st stage)
        Plaque (intermediate stage)
LI Nodule (last stage)
* Histologically-The changes are nonspecific in the early patch stage
and more characteristic in the nodular stage which show sheets of
plump proliferating spindle cells and endothelial in the dermis or
subcutanous tissue
1132. Thrombocythemia is characterized by
 a) Platelets elevation

 b) Low platelets

 c) Neutrophilia

 d) Monocytosis



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Platelets elevation
Thrombocythemia or thrombocytosis is the elevation of platelets.
1133. Which of the following is required for
      proper effects of Insulin?
 a) Selenium

 b) Iron

 c) Copper

 d) Chromium



Correct Answer - D

In association with insulin, chromium promotes the utilization of
glucose
Chromium is a component of a protein namely chromodulin which
facilitates the binding of insulin to cell receptor sites
Chromium
It is an essential nutrient for the maintenance of normal glucose
tolerance
Its deficiency causes insulin resistance.
Chromium administration has also been shown in several studies to
lower glucose and insulin levels in patients with type 2 diabetes.
It has been classified as not essential for mammals. (Cr (III) or
Cr3+).
Chromium deficiency is controversial or is at least extremely rare.
It has been attributed to only three people on parenteral nutrition,
which is when a patient is fed a liquid diet through intravenous drips.
In contrast, hexavalent chromium (Cr (VI) or Cr6+) is very toxic and
mutagenic when inhaled.
Cr (VI) has not been established as a carcinogen when in solution,
although it may cause allergic contact dermatitis (ACD).
Dietary supplements for chromium include chromium (III) picolinate,
chromium (III) polynicotinate, and related materials.
chromium (III) polynicotinate, and related materials.

Glutathione peroxidase requires selenium
Copper is an important constituent of catalse, cytochrome oxidase
and tyrosinase.
Zinc is also necessary for the storage and secretion of insulin
1134. Glucose fever is related with -
 a) Glucagon

 b) Parathyroid

 c) GH

 d) Aldosterone



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Aldosterone
Hypoglycemia in Addison disease is managed with
hydrocortisone/dexamethasone.
Administration of I.V. glucose in Addison leads to development of
fever and is called as "glucose fever".
In patients with adrenal insufficiency, who have not received
glucocorticoids glucose infusion may cause high fever (glucose
fever) followed by collapse and death.
1135. Not associated with diabetes mellitus
 a) Cushing syndrome

 b) Acromegaly

 c) Hypothyroidism

 d) Pheochromocytoma



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Hypothyroidism
1136. Patient on insulin in CKD stage 4. What
      is the dose adjustment of insulin
      required ?
 a) Increased insulin

 b) Decreased insulin

 c) Normal insulin

 d) Add DPP-4 inhibitors



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Decreased insulin
Insulin requirements show a biphasic course in diabetic patients with
renal disease. It is not uncommon for glucose control to deteriorate
as renal function deteriorates, as increasing insulin resistance can
affect both type I and type 2 diabetics.
1137. Which is the best indicator for short
      term control (2-3 weeks] of blood
      glucose ?
 a) Serum fructosamine

 b) HbA lc

 c) Blood sugar

 d) Urine sugar



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Serum fructosamine
Serum fructosamine → Tells sugar fluctuations in 2-3 weeks
Glycosylated hemoglobin → Tells sugar fluctuations in previous 6-8
weeks.
1138. Post Prandial capillary glucose should
      be mg/dl for adequate diabetes control
 a) < 100mg / dl

 b) < 140 mg / dl

 c) < 180 mg/dl

 d) < 200 mg/dl



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. < 180 mg/dl
HbA IC- two
Preprandial capillary plasma glucose- 70-130 mg/d1 <
Peak post prandial capillary plasma glucose -180 mg/d1 <
Blood pressure- 130/80
1139. Hyperpigmentation is seen with which
      hormone?
 a) FSH

 b) LH

 c) TSH

 d) ACTH



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. ACTH
Hyperpigmentation of the skin and mucous membranes often
precedes all other symptoms by months to years.
It is caused by the stimulant effect of excess adrenocorticotrophic
hormone (ACTH) on the melanocytes to produce melanin.
The hyperpigmentation is caused by high levels of circulating ACTH
that bind to the melanocortin 1 receptor on the surface of dermal
melanocytes.
Other melanocyte-stimulating hormones produced by the pituitary
and other tissues include alpha-MSH (contained within the ACTH
molecule), beta-MSH, and gamma-MSH. When stimulated, the
melanocyte changes the color of the pigment to a dark brown or
black.
The increased MSH in Addison's causes melanocytes to disperse
melanin in the epidermis thus increasing pigmentation.
1140. The most common cause of Cushing's
      syndrome is:
a) Pituitary adenoma

b) Adrenal adenoma

c) Ectopic ACTH

d) Iatrogenic steroids



Correct Answer - D
Answer is D (Iatrogenic steroids):
"The most common cause of Cushing's syndrome is Iatrogenic
administration of steroids for a variety of reasons."
1141. The most common cause of malignant
      adrenal mass is
a) Adrenocortical carcinoma

b) Malignant phaeochromocytoma

c) Lymphoma

d) Metastasis from another solid tissue tumor



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Metastasis from another solid tissue tumor
The most common cause of adrenal tumors is metastasis from
another solid tumor like breast cancer and lung cancer.
Malignant                        Percentage
Adrenocortical carcinoma         2-5%
Malignant
                                 <I%
pheochromocytoma
Adrenal neuroblastoma            <0- 1%
Lymphomas (incl. primary
                                 <1%
adrena lymphoma)
Metastases (most frequent :
                                 15%
Breast, lung)
1142. Primary Hyperaldosteronism can be
      diagnosed by all of the following
      criteria, except:
 a) Diastolic Hypertension without edema

 b) Hyperaldosteronism which is not supressed by volume
    expansion

 c) Low Plasma Renin Activity

 d) Metabolic Acidosis



Correct Answer - D
Answer is D (Metabolic Acidosis)
Class,Triad of Biochemical Criteria for diagnosis of Primary
Hyperaldoteronism
Hypokalemia with inappropriate kaliuresis (Metabolic alkalosis)
Suppressed plasma renin activity
Elevated Aldosterone levels that do not fall appropriately in
response to volume expansion or sodium load
Taken from Manual of Endocrinology & Metabolism 41h/150
1143. Most common cause of Addison's
      Disease in India is:
 a) Autoimmune

 b) Postpartum

 c) HIV

 d) Tuberculosis



Correct Answer - D
Answer is D (Tuberculosis):
'The commonest cause of adrenal insufficiency (Addison's disease)
in underdeveloped countries is Tuberculosis
1144. Female with blood sugar of 600 mg%
      and sodium of 110 mEq. Insulin was
      given, what will happen to serum
      sodium levels ?
 a) Sodium increase

 b) Sodium decrease

 c) Sodium unaffected

 d) Relative sodium deficiency



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Sodium increase
As the glucose level decreases, there is decrease in the osmolarity
of extracellular fluid. This causes movement of intracellular fluid
back into the cellular compartment producing increase in serum
sodium.
1145. Which of the following presents with
      hypokalemia and metabolic acidosis ?
 a) Diarrhea

 b) Vomiting

 c) Nasogastic suction

 d) Nasogastic suction



Correct Answer - A
Ans- A. Diarrhea
Diarrhea causes hypokalemia with metabolic acidosis.
Vomiting nosogastric suction and conn's syndrome cause metabolic
alkalosis.
1146. Hypertension with Hypokalemia is seen
      in:
 a) Bartter Syndrome

 b) Liddle's Syndrome

 c) Gitelman's Syndrome

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - B
Answer is B (Liddle's Syndrome)
Liddle's Syndrome is typically associated with Hypokalemia and
Hypertension. Rartter's Syndrome and Gitelman's Syndrome are
also associated with hypokalemia but without hypertension.
Liddle's Syndrome : Review
Pathophysiology:
• Autosomal dominant disorder.
• Genetic defect in the collecting tubule sodium channel, resulting in increased so
of inhibition by higher levels of intracellular sodium
Age of Presentation
• Often diagnosed at young age, but can present in adulthood due to phenotypic v
Clinical presentation
• Classic triad of hypertension, metabolic alkalosis, and hypokalemia.
• Consider iffamily history of hypertension and/or hypokalemia. at young age
Lab data
• Metabolic alkalosis, hrpokalemia (although some are low normal), low urinary a
Treatment:
• Lifelong. Potassium-sparing diuretic which closes the sodium channel (Amiloride
Spironolactone does not work because aldosterone is not causing the sodium chan
1147. In cobalamin deficiency which is not
      seen
 a) Microcytic anemia

 b) Long tract signs

 c) Loss of proprioception

 d) Rhomberg sign



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Microcytic anemia
Cobalmine deficiency causes megaloblastic (macrocytic) anemia
(not microcytic).
Cobalamine deficiency also causes subacute combined
degeneration of spinal cord due to involvement of posterior column,
affecting vibration, fine touch, and imbolance (Romberg sign).
1148. Hypernatremia causes all EXCEPT
 a) Seizure

 b) Thrombus

 c) Brain hemorrhage

 d) Central pontine myelinosis



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Central pontine myelinosis
Complication of hypernatremia are brain hemorrhage, seizures,
coma, thrombotic complications and raised ICT.
Central pontine myelinosis is classically associated with overlay
rapid correction of hyponatremia.
Clinical features-
Patients are irritable, restless weak and lethargic
Some have high pitched cry and hyperpnea.
Alert patient are very thirsty.
Hypernatremia causes fever although many patients have
underlying process that contributes to the fever.
1149. All of the following are associated with
      hyponatremia except
a) anorexia

b) Convulsions

c) Drowsiness

d) Myalgia



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Myalgia
Anorexia, nausea & vomiting
Coma
Convulsions
Drowsiness
Headache
Circulatory failure and hypotension
Hyponatremia can also cause muscle cramps and weakness.
1150. Most common type of multiple
      sclerosis?
 a) Relapsing remitting type

 b) Secondry progressive multiple sclerosis

 c) Progresive relapsing multiple scelrosis

 d) Primary progresive multiple sclerosis



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Relapsing remitting type
Repapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis (RRMS)
This is the most common form of multiple sclerosis.
About 85% of people with M.S. are initially diagnosed with relapsing-
remitting multiple sclerosis.
1151. In EEG which type of waves are seen in
      metabolic encephalopathy
 a) Alpha

 b) Beta

 c) Gamma

 d) Delta



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Delta
E.E.G. has been widely used to evaluate metabolic encephalopathy.
The E.E.G. findings are abnormal in acute encephalopathy stages
Metabolic
                     'vthm
encephalopathy
Grade I (almost      Dominant activity is rhythm with minima, theta
normal)              activity
Grade II (mildly     Dominant theta background with some alpha
abnormal)            and delta activities
Grade II
                     Continuous delta activety predominates, little
(morderately
                     activity of faster frequencies
abnormal)
Grade IV (severely Low-amplitude delta activity or suppression-
abnormal)            burst pattern
Grade V (extremely
                     Nearly "flat" tracing or electrocerebral inactivity
abnormal)
1152. Glasgow coma scale motor 4
      represents?
a) Withdrawal or flexion

b) Decorticate posturing

c) Decorticate posturing

d) Localise pain



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Withdrawal or flexion
1153. A patient after an accident was
      unconscious. On physical examination
      there was unilateral pupillary dilatation
      Possible reason for the same is
 a) Uncal herniation

 b) Tonsillar herniation

 c) Cingulate herniation

 d) Transcalvarial herniation



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Uncal herniation
Transtentorial herniation is the displacement of medial temporal lobe
into the tentorial opening it is usually seen after extradural
hemorrhage.
1154. Increased ICT is shown by
 a) Miosis

 b) Systemic hypotension

 c) Tachycardia

 d) Reduction in GCS



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Reduction in GCS
Increased ICT leads to bradycardia with Hypertension. Uncal
herniation of brain leads to ipsilateral pupillary dilatation. Reduction
in GCS due to damage to reticular activating system leads to
development of coma.
1155. Lateral
      vessels?
               medullary syndrome is due to the occlusion of which of the following



 a) Posterior superior cerebellar artery

 b) Anterior inferior cerebellar artery

 c) Basilar artery

 d) Vertebral artery



Correct Answer - D
Lateral medullary syndrome is otherwise known as Wallenberg’s syndrome or PICA syndrome or
vertebral artery syndrome.
Occlusive disease of the intracranial segment of the vertebral artery is a much more frequent
cause of the lateral medullary syndrome.
Signs and symptoms include:
Ipsilateral side
Horner’s syndrome
Decrease in pain and temperature sensation on ipsilateral side of face
Cerebellar signs (ataxia)
Contralateral side:
Decreased pain and temperature on contralateral body
Dysphagia, dysarthria, hoarseness, paralysis of vocal cord
Vertigo, nausea, vomiting, hiccups
Nystagmus, diplopia
No facial or extremity muscle weakness seen in this syndrome.

Ref: Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation Board Review By Sara Cuccurullo, 2004, Page
11 ; Harrison's Internal Medicine 17th ed Chapter 364. Cerebrovascular Diseases,
Brainstem disorders by Peter P Urban, Louis R Caplan page 205-207.
1156. Most common site of hypertensive
      intraparenchymal hemorrhage in brain:
      March 2013
 a) Pons

 b) Thalamus

 c) Putamen

 d) Cerebellum



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C i.e. Putamen
Sites of intracerebral hemorrhage includes putamen (55%),
thalamus (20-3-%), cerebrllum (10%), pons (5-7%) and subcortical
white matter (10-15%)
1157. Plaques jaunes are seen in
 a) Syphilis

 b) Head injury

 c) Endocarditis

 d) Atherosclerosis



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Head injury
Plaque Jaunes is a term used to describe the characteristic gross
appearance of old traumatic contusions on the surface of brain from
previous head injuries.
1158. Rademecker complex in EEG is seen in
      -
 a) SSPE

 b) vCJD

 c) cCJD

 d) Kuru



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. SSPE
Characteristic periodic activity (Rademecker complex) is seen on
EEG showing widespread cortical dysfunction in SSPE.
It is characterised by high voltage spike occuning at higlr lrequency
of 0.5- 1.5 seconds.
  1159. Commonest cause of cerebro vascular
        accident
    a) Infarction

    b) Infarction

    c) Embolism

    d) Aortic dissection



   Correct Answer - A
   Answer- A. Infarction
1. Ischemic (85%) (infarction) : Causes are embolism (75% of ischemic
   stroke) and thrombosis (25% of ischemic stroke).
2. Hemorrhagic (15%) : Intraparenchymal, subdural, epidural,
   subarachnoid.
1160. Which of the following sites is
      responsible for the amnestic defect in
      Wernicke's Korsakoff syndrome:
 a) Mamillary body

 b) Thalamus

 c) Periventricular Grey matter

 d) Hippocampus



Correct Answer - B
Answer is B (Thalamus):
The Amnestic effect in Wernicke's Korsakoff Syndrome is related to
lesions in the dorso-medial nuclei of the thalamus.
`Lesions in the dorsomedial nucleus of the thalamus seem to be the
best correlate of the memory disturbance and confabulation' -
Robbins
1161. Criteria for Brainstem death includes:
 a) Positive Doll's eye Reflex

 b) Absent pupillary light reflex and delated pupils

 c) Pinpoint pupils

 d) Positive vestibulo-ocular reflex



Correct Answer - B
Answer is B (Absent pupillary light reflex and delated pupils):
Brainstem death is defined by the absence of all brainstem mediated
cranial nerve reflexes.
Pupillary Light Reflex is a brainstem mediated cranial nerve reflex
that is absent in brainstem death. The pupils are usually midsized
but may be dilated (should not however be small).
Occulo-cephalic (Doll's eye) reflex and Vestibulo-ocular (Caloric)
reflex are both brainstem mediated cranial nerve reflexs that should
be absent in Brainstem death.
Criteria for Brain Death/Brainstem death
The definition of Brain stem death requires simultaneous
demonstration that the patient has irreversibly lost the capacity of
consciousness (Coma) and the capacity to breathe (Apnoea) both of
which are dependent on intact brainstem.
Clinical assessment of the integrity of Brainstem has two
components including assessment of the integrity of brainstem
mediated cranial nerve reflexes and the Apnea test.
                      Deep Unresponsive Coma
Patients with brain death show the deepest coma possible with total
unresponsiveness to all stimuli.
No spontaneous movement
No response to external stimuli (Verbal/ Deep pain)
Absence of all Brainstem Cranial Reflexes
All reflexes mediated by cranial nerve must be absent
Absent Pupillary Light reflex (CN II, III)
(Pupils are usually midsized but may be enlarged but they should
not be small)
Absent Corneal Reflex (CN V, VII)
Absent Vestibulocochlear Reflex (CN III, IV, VI, VIII) (No eye
movement in response to caloric irrigation of ears)
Absent Oculocephalic Reflex
(Absent Doll's eye reflex) Eyes will move with the head
(No occular movements on rapid turning of head).
Absent Gag Reflex (CNIX, X)
Absent Tracheal Cough Reflex (CNX)
Absent Central Motor Response to Pain (CN V, VII) (No response to
deep somatic stimulation).
    Complete Aponea in pressure of hypercarbia (Absence of
                    Brainstem Respiratory Reflex)
No respiratory effort in response to hypercarbia needs to be
demonstrated to show that aponea is due to brainstem (medullary)
damage
Absent respiratory movement during disconnection from the
ventilator with the PaCO2 > 60 mm Hg is required for the test to be
valid
Cranial nerve reflexes in Brain Stem Death testing:
                Cranial
Reflex                     Notes
                nerves
Pupillary light HAI        Use bright light source (not
reflex                     ophthalmoscope) in a dimmed
                           environment. Look for both
                           direct and consensual reaction.
                           Important reflex that interrogates at level of
                           midbrain
                           Stroke cornea with gauze, whilst gently
Corneal reflex V, VII      holding eyes open; avoid trauma to
                           cornea.
                           The various nuclei of V are found
                           throughout the whole length of the
                           brainstem, whilst
                            brainstem, whilst
                            that of VII (facial nerve) is in the upper
                            medulla.
Central                     Apply deep pressure stimulation centrally
              V, VII
response to                 (e.g. supra-orbital ridge) and peripherally
                            (e.g. nail bed). Look for central motor
deep somatic                response in the distribution of the facial
                            nerve.
                            Peripheral stimulation may illicit peripheral
stimulation
                            spinal reflexes.
              III, IV, VI, Check patency of external auditory canal
Cold caloric
              VIII          with auroscope. Flex head to 30° (or apply
                            30° head up tilt if cervical spine injury is
vestibulo-
                            suspected). Slowly irrigate canal with
ocular
                            5OrriL
reflex                      ice-cold water over 60s. Observe for
                            nystagmus for a further 30s. Contra-
                            indicated in
                            trauma-related otorrhea.
                            The nuclei of III and IV lie withjin the
                            midbrain, whilst those of VI and VIII are in
                            the
                            medulla.
Oculocephalic               Rapid lateral movement of the head
              VIII, Ill, VI
reflex                      normally results in eye deviation to the
(Doll's eye                 contralateral side, testing brainstem gaze
reflex)                     mechanism.
                            In brainstem death eyes remain in a fixed
                            position within the orbit.
Gag reflex    IX, X         Stimulate uvula under direct vision with
                            throat spatula, observing for contraction of
                            soft palate.
                            The nuclei of IX and X lie in the medulla.
Tracheal      X             Expose patient to umblicus. Stimulate
cough reflex                trachea to level of carina by introduction of
                            sterile suction catheter down endotracheal
                            tube. Observe for cough response
tube. Observe for cough response
1162. Which of the following is the most
      common initial presenting feature of
      multiple sclerosis:
 a) Optic Neuritis

 b) Cerebellar Ataxia

 c) Internuclear ophthalmoplegia

 d) Diplopia



Correct Answer - A
Answer is A (Optic Neuritis):
Optic Neuritis is the most frequent initial presenting feature of MS
amongst the options provided.
The most common earliest presenting features of multiple sclerosis
are transient sensory defects followed by visual disturbances due to
optic neuritis.
Initial Symptoms of MS
                   Percent of                  Percent of
Symptom                         Symptom
                   Cases                       Cases
Sensory loss       37           Lhermitte's 3
Optic neuritis     36           Pain           3
Weakness           35           Dementia 2
Paresthesias       24           Visual loss 2
Diplopia           15           Facial palsy 1
Ataxia             11           Impotence 1
Vertigo            6            Myokymia 1
Paroxysmal
                   4            Epilepsy       1
attacks
                     4                     1
          4             1
Bladder       Falling
1163. Absence of Corpus callosum leads to
 a) Hemiparesis

 b) Hemisensory loss

 c) Astereognosis

 d) No neurological manifestations



Correct Answer - D
No neurological manifestations [Ref: Internet reference]
Agenesis of corpus callosum is a rare birth defect (congenital
disorder) in which there is complete or partial absence of corpus
callosum.
Corpus callosum is a band of tissue connecting the two hemispheres
of the brain. Fibres of corpus callosum arise from the superficial
layers of the cerebral cortex and they project to the homotypic
regions of the contralateral cortex by passing through the corpus
collosum while crossing the midline.
Clinical features of Agenesis of corpus callosum
Signs and symptoms of agenesis of corpus callosum vary greatly
among individuals.
Patients usually do not have any neurological manifestations.
However, some features common in agenesis of corpus callosum
are:​- Vision impairment
* Low muscle tone (hypotonia)
Poor motor coordination
* Delay in motor milestones such as sitting and walking.
Low perception of pain
* Delayed toilet training
* Chewing and swallowing difficulties
* Early speech and language delays
Social difficulties
Other characteristics sometimes associated with callosal disorders
are:​- Seizures
* Spasticity
* Early, feeding difficulties and or gastric reflux-.
* Hearing impairments
* Abnormal head and facial features
* Mental retardation
Investigation
CT and MRI reveal "Bat wing" deformity of the ventricles.
Treatment
There are currently no specific medical treatments for callosal
disorders.
An important point
The neurological abnormalities associated with corpus callosum are
not caused by absence of corpus callosum per se.
* These conditions are believed to be caused due to associated
cerebral anomalies rather than in corpus callosum per sc.
* The most common associated brain anomalies with absent corpus
callosum are
* Dandy walker malformation
* lnterhenfispheric cyst with hydrocephalus
* Migrational disorder
* Absence of the inferior vertnis
* The children who had the best prognosis without any significant
neurological sequale were those with isolated agenesis of corpus
collosum.
* The children with the worst prognosis and neurological sequale
were those with agenesis of corpus callosum and migrational
disorder with or without Dandy — walker malformation.
* Hence prognosis is determined primarily by the underlying or
associated malformation.
1164. Which one of the following is correct
      regarding Eaton-Lambert syndrome-
 a) It commonly affects the ocular muscle

 b) Neostigmine is the drug of choice for this syndrome

 c) Repeated electrical stimulation enhances muscle power in it.

 d) It is commonly associated with adenocarcinoma of lung



Correct Answer - C
Answer is C (Repeated electrical stimulation enhances muscle
power):
'Patients with Lambert – Eaten myaethenic syndrome show
incremental rather than decremental response on repeated nerve
stimulation' – Harrison 17th/2674
'Muscle response to stimulation of its motor nerve increases
remarkably if nerve is stimulated repeatedly even in muscles that are
clinically weak' - CMDT
Lambert Eaten Myasthenia Syndrome commonly involves
proximal limb muscles and muscles of trunk
Extraocular muscles are the most commonly involved in
Myaesthenia Gravis and not in Lambert Eaten Myasthenia
Syndrome
Neostigmine is not considered the drug of choice
Plasmapharesis and immunosuppression form mainstay of
treatment 3, 4 Diaminopyridine is the drug of choice for
enhancement of neuromuscular transmission.
Pyridostigmine (or Neostigmine) may be sympatomatically helpful
but their response is variable – Harrison & CMDT
Lambert Eaten Myasthenia Syndrome is associated with small
cell carcinoma of lung
Lambert Eaten Myasthenia Syndrome is associated with small cell
carcinoma of lung and not adenocarcinoma
1165. The following are components of Brown
      Sequard syndrome except :
 a) Ipsilateral extensor plantar response

 b) Ipsilateral pyramidal tract involvement

 c) Contralateral spinothalamic tract involvement

 d) Contralateral posterior column involvement



Correct Answer - D
Answer is D (Contralateral posterior column involvement):
Brown – Sequard syndrome or hemisection of the spinal cord leads
to loss of joint position and vibratory sense (posterior coluntn
movement) on the ipsilateral side and not on the contralateral side. –
Harrison 16th / 2441, 144
Brown sequard syndrome: Hemisection of spinal cord
Ipsilateral involvement of corticospinal tract : ipsilateral loss of motor
power.
Ipsilateral involvement of posterior column : ipsilateral loss of joint
position and vibratory sense.
Contralateral involvement of spinothalamic tract : contralateral loss
of joint position and vibratory sense.
Segmental signs such as radicular pain muscle atrophy or loss of
deep tendon reflexes arc unilateral (Lower motor neuron signs at
level of lesion).
1166. First Symptoms of parkinsons disease
      is -
 a) Postural instability

 b) Rigidity

 c) Tremors

 d) Bradykinesia



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Tremors
Parkinsonism is a progressive degenerative, extrapyramidal disorder
of muscle movement, due to dysfunction in basal ganglia,
comprising four cardinal features
Bradykinesia or hypokinesia
Muscle rigidity
Resting tremor
1167. Which of the following metal ions is
      associated with secondary
      Parkinsonisms:
 a) Mangnese (Mn)

 b) Magnesium (Mg)

 c) Selenium (Se)

 d) Molybednum (Me)



Correct Answer - A
Answer is A (Mangnese (Mn)):
Manganese ion exposure is implicated in the free radical damage of
the basal ganglia causing Parkinsonism.
Toxins Implicated in Parkinsonism (Harrison)
Manganese (Mn)
MPTP (1 Methyl - > Phenyl –1, 2, 3, 6 tetrahydropyridine)
Carbonmonoxide
Carbondisulphide
Ctanide
Hexane
Methanol
Toxins reported to induce Parkinonism: (Handbook of Atypical
Parkinsonism)
Betel nut (plus antiPsychotics)
Carbon monoxide
Contrast agent for cardiac catheterization
Cyanide
Ethanol intoxication, ethanol withdrawal
Ethylene glycol
Herbicides (paraquat, diquat, glyphosate)
Heroin
Hydrogen sulfide
Kava-kava
Manganese
Maneb (Manganese Ethylene-Bis-Dithiocarbamate)
Mercury
Methanol
Methcathinone (manganese ephedrone)
MPTP (I-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine)
Organic solvents (carbon disulfide, n-hexane, toluene,
trichloroethylene)
Organophosphate insecticide poisoning
Petroleum products
1168. Isaac syndroma is characterised by -
 a) Peripheral nerve excitability

 b) Opsoclonus

 c) Encephalomyelitis

 d) Limbic encephalitis



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Peripheral nerve excitability
Isacc syndrome (neuromyotonia)
Peripheral nerve hyperexcitability
Spontaneous and continuous muscle fiber activity of peripheral
nerve origin.
Clinical features include cramps, muscle twitching (fasciculations or
myokymia)
Stiffness
Delayed
Muscle relaxation (pseudomyotonia)
Spontaneous or evoked carpal or pedal spasms.
1169. In Alzheimer's disease (AD) which of
      the following is not seen:
 a) Aphasia

 b) Acalculia

 c) Agnosia

 d) Apraxia



Correct Answer - C
Ans. None > C. Agnosia tRej. Kaplan anal Jaadock s Synopsis of
Psychiatry 10/c pi-t?
Aphasia, Apraxia, Acalculia and Agnosia may all be seen in
Alzheimer's Dementia. Agnosia in Alzheimer's disease usually
presents late in the disease and is not included in the ICD-10
Diagnostic criteria for dementia in Alzheimer's disease with early
onset and hence may be selected as the single best answer by
exclusion
1170. DOC for treatment of SSPE -
 a) Abacavir

 b) Inosine pranobex

 c) Glatiramer

 d) Interferon



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Inosine pranobex
Inosine pranobex is used as an immune-modulator for the
management of patients with-
Immune-depression sufereing from viral infections as SSPE
recurrent herpes simplex genital warts.
1171. Most common acute complication of
      dialysis is
 a) Hypotension

 b) Bleeding

 c) Dementia

 d) Muscle cramps



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Hypotension
Hypotension is the most common acute complication of
hemodialysis particularly among patients with diabetes mellitus.
Factors involved are :-
Excessive ultrafiltration, with inadequate compensatory vascular
filling, impaired vasoactive or autonomic response, osmolar shifts,
overzealous use of antihypertensives
1172. Which vitamin toxicity is associated
      with excessive sweating -
 a) Choline

 b) Biotin

 c) Folic cid

 d) Vitamin B



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Choline
Toxicity from choline results in -
Hypotension
Cholinergic sweating
Diarrhea
Salivation
Fishy body odor
1173. Dermatitis may be a clinical
      manifestation of deficiency states of all
      of following nutrients except -
 a) Biotin

 b) Niacin

 c) Pyridoxine

 d) Thiamine



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Thiamine
Vitamin B3 (Niacin) deficiency causes dermatitis. Biotin and Vitamin
B6 (pyridoxin) deficiency causes seborrheic dermatitis.
1174. Aspirin decreases the risk of
      development of which of the following -
 a) Colorectal cancer

 b) Stomach cancer

 c) Carcinoid

 d) MALToma



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Colorectal cancer
Regular aspirin use reduces the risk of colon adenomas and
carcinomas as well as death from large-bowel cancer
1175. Lafora's disease presents with -
 a) G.T.C.S

 b) Myoclonic epilepsy

 c) Petit mal epilepsy

 d) Partial seizures



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Myoclonic epilepsy
Lofora disease is an autosomal recessive poliencephalopathy of late
childhood or early adult life.
It is characterized by progressive dementia, dysarthria, visual loss,
pyramidal & cerebellar signs, and myoclonic & other seizures.
The diagnostic pathological finding is lofora bodies.
1176. Mosaic pattern of coment line is
      characteristically seen in -
 a) Hyperthyroidism

 b) Paget's disease of bone

 c) Renal osteodystrophy

 d) Osteomalacia



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Paget's disease of bone
Mosaic pattern of cement line is characteristically associated with
paget's disease of the bone
1177. Kaposi sarcoma is commonly seen in ?
 a) Upper limbs

 b) Lower limbs

 c) Head and Neck

 d) Trunk



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Lower limbs
" It occurs predominantly on the skin and can involve virtually any
organ, perhaps except the brain. The initially described form, now
known as classic KS, predominantly involves the lower extremities of
elderly men. KS is now the most common tumor seen in HIV-
infected patients"- Devita's Oncology
1178. Most common cause of death in cancer
      is -
 a) Bleeding

 b) Infection

 c) Respiratory failure

 d) Renal failure



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Infection
The most common causes of death in patients with cancer are
infection (leading to circulatory failure), respiratory failure, hepatic,
and renal failure. Intestinal blockage may lead to inanition and
starvation.
1179. Hyperuricemia can be caused by all
      except -
 a) Ethanol

 b) Thiazide

 c) Furosemide

 d) None



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is. D. None
Causes of drug or diet induced hyperuricemia
Diuretics (thiazides and loop diuretics)
Cyclosporine and tacrolimus
Low dose salicylates.
Ethambutol
Pyrazinamide
Ethanol
Levodopa
Methoxyflurane
Laxative abuse (alkalosis)
Salt restriction
1180. All of the following are true about Gout,
      except:-
 a) Occurs due to accumulation of urate crystals in joint

 b) Can be pptd by pyrazinamide

 c) Birefringement crystals are present in joint

 d) Occurs more in females



Correct Answer - D
Answer is D (Occurs more in females):
Gout is more widespread in men than in women.
Women represent only 5-20% of patients with gout.
Women are seldom affected until after menopause.
1181. Most common organism associated
      with reactive arthritis is:
 a) Staphylococcus

 b) Shigella

 c) Chlamydia

 d) Yersinia



Correct Answer - C
Chlamydia [Ref: Harrison 17/e p2113;
http://www.emedicine.com/derm/TOPIC207.HTM;
http://www.entedicine.com/med/TOPIC1998.11TM]
Reactive arthritis is a systemic disorder of unknown etiology that is
defined by the development of conjunctivitis, urethritis, arthritis, and
mucocutaneous lesions following an episode of infection elsewhere
in the body.
In 1916, Hans Reiter described the triad of nongonococcal urethritis,
conjunctivitis, and arthritis in a young German officer with bloody
dysentery.The classic triad of the disease, namely urethritis, arthritis,
and conjunctivitis, is present in only one third of the patients.
Reactive arthritis is frequently associated with the human leukocyte
antigen B27 (1-ILA-B27) haplotype.
The etiology of reactive arthritis remains uncertain. The most
accepted theory about the pathophysiology of reactive arthritis
involves initial activation by a microbial antigen, followed by an
autoimmune reaction that involves the skin, eyes, and joints.
Two forms are recognized: a sexually transmitted form and a
dysenteric form. Gastrointestinal infections with Shigella,
Salmonella, and Campylobacter species and other microorganisms,
and genitourinary infections especially with Chlamydia trachomatis
have been found to trigger reactive arthritis.
Young children tend to have the post dysenteric form, whereas
adolescents and young men are most likely to acquire reactive
arthritis after they have urethritis.
It's not clear which organism is most commonly associated with
reactive arthritis. Both Shigella and Chlamydia appear to he most
common. After going through many articles from journals on the net,
Chlamydia appears to he the most common. We would prefer to go
with Chlamydia. (However if any one finds a reliable reference
documenting the most common organism, please mail us at our
email id.
The article on Reactive Arthritis in the journal "Best Practice &
Research Clinical Rheumatology" Vol. 20, No. 6, pp. 1119e1137,
2006 writes- "The prevalence is estimated to be 30-40 cases per
100,000 adults; the annual incidence is estimated to be 4.6/100,000
.for Chlamydia-induced arthritis and 5/100,000 .for enterobacteria-
induced reactive arthritis.4,5 However, real numbers may be
significantly higher?
The following article "Frequency of triggering bacteria in patients
with reactive arthritis and undifferentiated oligoarthritis and the
relative importance of the tests used for diagnosis" in Ann Rheum
Dis. 2001 April; 60(4): 337​343 at the following website-
http://www.pubmedcentralmih.gov/articlerenderfcgi?artid=1753604
writes its conclusion as:
"CONCLUSIONS—Chlamydia trachomatis, yersinia, and salmonella
can be identified as the causative pathogen in about 50% of patients
with probable or possible ReA if the appropriate tests are used."
1182. In long standing rheumatoid arthritis
      which will be seen -
 a) Milk alkali syndrome

 b) Nephrolithiasis

 c) Paradoxical aciduria

 d) Secondary amylodosis



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Secondary amylodosis
Reactive amyloid A (AA) amyloidosis, one of the most severe
complications of RA, is serious, potentially life threatening disorder
caused by deposition of AA amyloid fibrils in multiple organs
1183. Which is the most common tumor
      leading to death in adults?
 a) Lung cancer

 b) Prostate cancer

 c) Colorectal cancer

 d) Leukemia



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Lung cancer
Lung cancer constitutes upto29% of all cancer related deaths in
males and 26% of all cancer related death in woman.
1184. A 23-year old woman has experienced
      episodes of myalgias, pleural effusion,
      pericarditis and arthralgias without joint
      deformity over course of several years.
      The best laboratory screening test to
      diagnose her disease would be -
 a) CD, lymphocyte count

 b) Erythrocyte sedimentation rate

 c) Antinuclear antibody

 d) Assay for thyroid hormones



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Antinuclear antibody
Sensitive test for SLE → Antinuclear antibodies (ANA)
Specific test for SLE → Anti dsDNA, Anti Sm
1185. Which of the following antibodies is
      highly specific for systemic lupus
      erythematosus -
 a) Anti-Sm

 b) Anti-RO-1

 c) Anti-UIRNP

 d) Anti-Centromere



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Anti-Sm
Sensitive test for SLE → Antinuclear antibodies (ANA)
Specific test for SLE → Anti dsDNA, Anti Sm
1186. Gaisbock syndrome is known as
 a) Primary Familial Polycythemia

 b) High Altitude Erythrocytosis

 c) Spurious Polycythemia

 d) Polycythemia Vera



Correct Answer - C
Answer is C (Spurious Polycythemia)
Gaisbock syndrome refers to Spurious Polycythemia or Relative
Erythrocytosis due to decreased plasma volume.
1187. Alzehiemer type II astrocyte are seen in
      -
 a) Hepatic encephalopathy

 b) Alzehiemer's

 c) Parkinsonism

 d) Biswanger disease



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Hepatic encephalopathy
Swollen astrocytes in hepatic encephalopathy are called Alzheimer
type II astrocytes. Their nuclei are large and appear clear in H & E
stains. They are also seen in Wilson disease.
1188. Polyarticular onset JRA involves more
      than how many joints -
 a) 3

 b) 4

 c) 5

 d) 6



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. 5
Polyarticular JRA
It is characterized by involvement of 5 or more joints.
There are two subtypes :-
i) Polyarticular RA positive
It is characterized bysymmetrical joint involvement along with
Uveitis, and rheumatoid nodules.
RA factor and ANA are positive.
ii) Polyarticular RA negative
RA factor and rheumatoid nodules are not seen.
1189. Streptococcus bovis infection is
      associated with -
 a) CLL

 b) Hairy cell leukemia

 c) Colorectal cancer

 d) Multiple myeloma



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Colorectal cancer
Colon and rectal tumors Streptococcus bovis (bacteremia)
1190. Which of the following is given to
      decrease Serum Triglycerides?
 a) Fibrates

 b) Statine

 c) Ezetimibe

 d) Niacin



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Fibrates
Fibrates are drugs of choice for hypertriglyceridemia (type IV) and
chylomicronemia (type I).
1191. Chvostek sign is seen in:
      March 2013
 a) Hypercalcemia

 b) Hypoparathyroidism

 c) Insulinoma

 d) Diabetes mellitus



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B i.e. Hypoparathyroidism
Hypocalcemia
Idiopathic hypoparathyroidism is associated with:
Genetic syndrome of hypoparathyroidism,
- Addison's disease and
– Mucocutaneous candid iasis
Pseudohypoparathyroidism: No deficiency of parathormone, but
target organ (bone and kidney) are unresponsive to its action
Chvostek's sign: Contraction of facial muscles, elicited by light
tapping of the facial nerve
ECG changes: Prolongation of QT interval
1192. Blood transfusion associated acute
      lung injury occurs due to -
 a) Nosocomial infections

 b) HLA mediated

 c) Auto-immune disorder

 d) Genetic susceptibility



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. HLA mediated
TRALI usually results from the transfusion of donor plasma that
contains high titre anti HLA class II antibodies that bind recipient
leucocytes.
The leucocytes aggregate in the pulmonary vasculature and release
mediators that increase capillary permeability.
Testing the donor's plasma for Anti HLA antibodies can support this
diagnosis.
1193. I.R.I.S. is -
 a) Immune reconstitution idiopathic syndrome

 b) Immune reconstitution immunological syndrome

 c) Immune reconstitution inflammatory syndroma

 d) Inflammatory reconstitution immune syndrome



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Immune reconstitution inflammatory syndroma
The term "immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome" (IRIS)
describes a collection of inflammatory disorders associated with
paradoxical worsening of preexisting infectious processes following
the initiation of highly active antiretroviral therapy.
1194. Dietary deficiency of which vitamin
      usually does not exist -
 a) Vitamin-B6

 b) Thiamine

 c) Vitamin-E

 d) Vitamin-D



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Vitamin-E
Dietary deficiency of vitamin E does not exist.
1195. Manifestations of vitamin E.deficiency
      are all except -
 a) Hemolytic anemia

 b) Posterior column abnormalities

 c) Cerebellar ataxia

 d) Autonomic dysfunction



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Autonomic dysfunction
The clinical manifestations are edema, hemolytic anemia (due to
fragile red cell's membrane as a result of lipid peroxidation) and
thrombocytosis. Nerve and muscle membrane damage may occur.
Vitamin E deficiency causes axonal degeneration of the large
myelinated axons and results in posterior column and
spinocerebellar symptoms.
1196. Martel sign is seen in -
 a) Gout

 b) Ankylosing spondylitis

 c) Osteoarthritis

 d) Rheumatoid arthritis



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Gout
Martel's sign is not present in all cases of gouty arthritis.
Martel's sign, which is a radiological sign (straight arrow) to describe
the overhanging margin of the new bone alone the edge of erosion.
1197. HIV RNA by PCR can detect as low as
 a) 30 copies viral RNA/ml of blood

 b) 40 copies viral RNA/ml of blood

 c) 50 copies of viral RNA/ml of blood

 d) 60 copies of viral RNA/ml of blood



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., 40 copies viral RNA/ml of blood
This assay generates data in the form of number of copies of HIV
RNA per milli litre of serum or plasma and can reliably detect as few
as 40 copies of HIV RNA per mili litre of plasma.
Research based assay can detect down to one copy/ml.
1198. All are seen in carney's triad except -
 a) Atrial myxoma

 b) GIST

 c) Chondroma

 d) Paraganglioma



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Atrial myxoma
Extra-adrenal paraganglioma (e.g. extra adrenal phaeo-
chromocytoma)
Gastrontestinal stromal tumors previously known as gastric
epithelioid leiomyosarcoma
Pulmonary chondroma hamartoma only 2 of the 3 tumors are
present at the time of diagnosis typically affects young people.
1199. All are true about cross-matching of
      blood except -
 a) Mandatory in all cases except emergency

 b) Recipient serum is tested against donor packed cells

 c) Donor serum is tested against recipient packed cells

 d) Involves visible agglutination



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Donor serum is tested against recipient packed
cells
Cross matching involves testing the patients serum with donor cells
to determine whether the patient has an antibody which may cause
a hemolytic transfusion reaction
1200. Smoking may be associated with all of
         the following cancers, except:
 a) Ca Larynx

 b) Ca Nasopharynx

 c) Ca Bladder

 d) None



Correct Answer - D
Ans is None > Ca Nasopharynx
All the given options are mentioned by Harrison:
Harrison 17/e p2737 writes- "Tobacco smoking causes cancer of the
lung, oral cavity, naso-, oro-, and hypopharynx, nasal cavity and
paranasal sinuses, larynx, esophagus, stomach, pancreas, liver,
kidney (body and pelvis), ureter, urinary bladder, and uterine cervix
and also causes myeloid leukemia. There is evidence suggesting
that cigarette smoking may play a role in increasing the risk of
colorectal and possibly premenopausal breast cancer, but there is
no association with postmenopausal breast cancer. There does not
appear to be a causal link between cigarette smoking and cancer of
the endometrium, and there is a lower risk of uterine cancer among
postmenopausal women who smoke."
Thus the answer should be none, however Nasopharyngeal
carcinoma is found to be least associated with smoking. Head &
Neck Cancers by Enslow Jacobs 2003e p492 writes-"Association
between smoking and nasopharyngeal carcinoma has been shown
only by a few studies. If the association of tobacco and NPC is real,
the possible mechanism of tumor induction would be the
nitrosamines and its precursors in tobacco."
1201. In which of causes of oral ulcer, Auto-
      antibodies are not seen?
 a) Behcet disease

 b) SLE

 c) Pemphigus

 d) Celiac disease



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Behcet disease
Behcet's disease is classified among the vasculitides laboratory
diagnostic does not include regularly autoantibodies associated with
vascular manifestations of systemic autoimmune disease.
1202. Incorrect about LAMB syndrome -
a) Lentigines

b) Atrial Myxoma

c) Myaesthenic syndrome

d) Blue Nevi



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Myaesthenic syndrome
LAMB syndrome is characterized by presence of :-
Lentigines
Atrial Myxoma
Blue nevi.
  1203. Best management after human bite -
   a) Ampicillin plus sulbactam

   b) Clindamycin plus TMP-SMX

   c) Fibroquinolone

   d) Doxycycline



   Correct Answer - A
   Answer- A. Ampicillin plus sulbactam
1. Ampicillin/sulbactam
2. Imipenem
3. Cefoxitin in penicillin allergics
1204. The Vitamin which has inhibitory effect
      on wound healing is -
 a) Vitamin -A

 b) Vitamin - E

 c) Vitamin -C

 d) Vitamin B-complex



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Vitamin-E.
Systemic vitamin E and glucocorticoids inhibit the inflammatory
response and collagen synthesis, thereby possibly impeding the
healing process.
1205. Number of barr bodies in klinfellter's
      syndrome is -
 a) 0

 b) 1

 c) 2

 d) 3



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. 1
Found in female But -
Kleinefelter syndrome is male with one Barr body.
Turner syndrome is female without Barr body.
1206.
Which of these is not a part of extracellular
matrix:
 a) Laminin

 b) Fibronectin

 c) Integrins

 d) Collagen



Correct Answer - C
C i.e. Integrins
- Extracellular matrix proteins are collagen, elastin, fibrillin,
fibronectin, laminin and proteoglycans (GAGs) Mn- "Call Ela For
Last Prose" Whereas cell adhesion molecules present in cytoplasm
or cell membrane include integrins, selectins, cadherins and
immunoglobulin family CAMsQ.
- Integrins are cell surface adhesion protein that provide linkage
between cell outside & inside, between cell- cell and between cell &
extracellular matrix.
1207. Which of the following substances is
      primarily found in tendons?
 a) Collagen

 b) Fibrin

 c) Fibrillin

 d) Protedglycans



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Collagen
Tendon is primarily made up of collagen.
1208. Which of the following condition does
      not cause multiple painful ulcers on
      tongue?
a) TB

b) Sacroidosis

c) Herpes

d) Behcet disease



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Sacroidosis
Painful ulcers in mouth
Apthous ulcers
Behcet disease
Denture stomatitis
Thermal burns
Tuberculosis
Herpes
Carcinoma tongue
Arsenic poisoning
1209. DOC for acute attack of Hereditary
      angioneurotic edema
 a) Danazol

 b) Cl, inhibitor concentrate

 c) Icatibant

 d) Methylprednisolone



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Cl inhibitor concentrate
Medication
C1 inhibitor concentrate (Plasma-derived) (Berinert, Berinert P,
Cinryze.
Recombinant C1 inhibitor Conestat alfa (Ruconest, Rhucin).
Bradykinin Bzreceptor antagonist Icatibant (Firazyr).
Kallikrein inhibitor Ecallantide (Kalbitor)
Plasma
1210. In a patient who was brought to
      casualty after RTA with pulse rate 108,
      SBP 80. Which fluid is to be given
      ideally?

 a) Plasma

 b) Normal Saline

 c) Blood

 d) 5% dextrose



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Normal Saline
Initial resuscitation requires rapid reexpansion of the circulating
intravascular blood volume along with interventions to control
ongoing losses.
Volume resuscitation is initiated with the rapid infusion of either
isotonic saline or a balanced salt solution such as Ringer's lactate
1211. Which can be give in hemorrhagic
      stroke ?
 a) Normal saline

 b) Colloids

 c) Blood transfusion

 d) Hypertonic fluids



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Normal saline
Normal saline initially should be used for maintenance and
replacement fluids :
Hypotonic fluids are contraindicated as they may exacerbate
cerebral edema and intracranial pressure.
Hypervolemia should be avoided as it may worsen cerebral edema.
1212. Flushing with niacin in reduced by -
 a) Laropiprant

 b) Premedication with aspirin

 c) Tachyphylaxis

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. All of the above
Laropiprant (selective prostaglandin D2 receptor antagonid)
Premedication with aspirin
Flushing as subject to tachyphylaxis and often improves with time.
1213. True abour drug induced SLE is except
      ?
 a) Female: Male ratio=9:1

 b) Anti-histone Antibodies

 c) CNS involvement not common

 d) Renal involvement not common



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Female: Male ratio=9:1
It is predominant in caucasians
It has less female preddiction than SLE
It rarely involves kidneys or brain
It is rarely associated with anti Ds DNA
It is commonly associated with antibodies to histones
It usually resolves over several weeks after discontinuation of the
offending medication.
1214. Obesity is seen in all except
 a) Cushing syndrome

 b) Pickwinian syndrome

 c) Prader willi syndrome

 d) Sipple syndrome



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is `d' i.e., Sipple syndrome
Important syndromes associated with obesity
Albright hereditary osteodystrophy (pseudohypoparathyroidism type
la)
Alstrom syndrome
Bardet-Biedl syndrome
Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome
Carpenter syndrome
Cohen syndrome • Prader-willi syndrome
1215. Man working in hot environment &
      drinking lots of water without intake of
      salts is liable to develop -
 a) Heat hyperpyrexia

 b) Heat cramps

 c) Heat stroke

 d) Heat encephalopathy



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Heat cramps
Heat cramps/Miner's cramps/Stoker's cramp/Firemen's cramp
These are painful spasm of voluntary muscles which follow sternous
work in a hot atmosphere.
These are caused by loss of water and salt in profuse prespiration
(sweating).
1216. After Road traffic accident a patient
      presented to casualty with vitals
      showing BP of 90/60 mm Hg with heart
      of 56 bpm. Which kind of shock occurs
      ?
 a) Cardiogenic

 b) Neurogenic

 c) Distributive

 d) Hypovolemia shock



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Neurogenic
Neurogenic shock is a distributive type of shock resulting in low
blood pressure, occasionally with a slowed heart rate, that is
attributed to the disruption of the autonomic pathways within the
spinal cord.
It can occur after damage to the central nervous system such as
spinal cord injury.
1217. Intracranial pressure may be increased
      by all of the following drugs except -
 a) Hypervitaminosis A

 b) Corticosteroids

 c) Quinolones

 d) Aminoglycosides



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Aminoglycosides
1218. Drainage of cervical abscess is an
      example of -
 a) Clean contaminated wound

 b) Clean uncontaminated wound

 c) Unclean uncontaminated wound

 d) Dirty infected wound



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Dirty infected wound
Class IV: This class of wound is considered dirty-contaminated.
These include wounds that have been exposed to fecal material.
Cervical drainage abscess is an example of Class IV wound.
1219. Most common location of ectopic
      salivary gland is -
 a) Cervical lymph nodes

 b) Anterior mediastinum

 c) Posterior triangle

 d) Parathyroid gland



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Cervical lymph nodes
Salivary gland heterotopia is where salivary gland acini cells are
present in an abnormal location without any duct system.
The most common location is the cervical lymph nodes.
Other reported sites of heterotopic salivary gland tissue are the
middle ear, parathyroid glands, thyroid gland, pituitary gland,
cerebellar pontine angle, soft tissue medial to sternocleidomastoid,
stomach, rectum and vulva
1220. Classic triad inRenal cell carcinoma
      includes all of the following, Except:
 a) Hematuria

 b) Hypertension

 c) Flank mass

 d) Abdominal Pain



Correct Answer - B
Answer is B (Hypertension):
Hypertension may be seen in patients with Renal cell carcinoma but
it does not firm part of the classically described triad.
Classic Triad of Renal cell carcinoma (seen in 10-20% of
patients)
Hematuria (Gross)
Pain (Abdominal / Flank)
Mass (Abdominal /Flank)
1221. All of the following are paraneoplastic
      syndromes for renal cell carcinoma
      except -
 a) Fever

 b) Anaemia

 c) Amyloidosis

 d) Acanthosis Nigricans



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Acanthosis Nigricans
Hypertension
Abnormal liver function (Stauffers syndrome ie non metastatic
hepatic dysfunction)
Hypercalcemia
Neuromyopathy
Amyloidosis
Increased ESR (MC paraneoplastic syndrome)
Dysfibrogenemia
Galactorrhoea
Feminization and masculanization
  1222. ESWL is contraindicated in which of the
        following stones -
   a) Cysteine stones

   b) Oxalate Stones

   c) Urate stones

   d) Phosphate stones



   Correct Answer - A
   Answer- A. Cysteine stones
   Contraindications for ESWL -
1. Uncorrected Bleeding disorder
2. Cysteine stones
3. Weight greater than 300 pounds
4. Pregnancy
5. Cardiac Pacemaker
6. Severe Orthpaedic deformity
7. UTI
8. Severe renal Failure
1223. Surgery for undescended testis is recommended at what age?
 a) 6 months

 b) 12 months

 c) 24 months

 d) 36 months



Correct Answer - A
Optimum age for surgery in case of undescended testis is 6 months.

The surgical procedure done is called orchidopexy.

Earlier intervention (Six months of age) should be considered in order to theoretically
prevent the complications of crytorchidism that may be manifested before 1 year of age.

Ref: Nursing care of the pediatric surgical patient By Nancy Tkacz Browne, Page 147-8;
CPDT, 20th Edition, Page 974; Campbell's Urology, 9th Edition, Page 3775
1224. Pseudoclaudication is caused by
 a) Femoral Artery stenosis

 b) Popliteal Artery stenosis

 c) Lumbar canal stenosis

 d) Radial Artery stenosis



Correct Answer - C
Ans is C i.e. Lumbar Canal Stenosis
Pseudoclaudication is the term used for neurogenic claudication
caused due to lumbar canal stenosis. Its symptoms mimic
intermittent claudication of PVD.
Neurogenic claudication, consists of back and buttock or leg pain
induced by walking or standing and relieved by sitting or changing
posture. Symptoms in the legs are usually bilateral. Unlike vascular
claudication, symptoms are often provoked by standing without
walking.
Spinal stenosis can be acquired, congenital, or due to a combination
of these factors. Congenital causes include achondroplasia,
idiopathic. Acquired causes are degenerative diseases (spondylosis,
spondylolisthesis, scoliosis), trauma, spine surgery, metabolic or
endocrine disorders (epidural lipomatosis, osteoporosis,
acromegaly, renal osteodystrophy, hypoparathyroidism), and Paget's
disease.
Difference between Vascular and Neurogenic claudication
Patients with vascular claudication always have pain when they walk
a relatively constant distance on level ground; they do not have
variable days when they can walk for considerably greater distances
without pain. Patients of vascular claudication, often know exactly
how far or for how long they can walk before the symptoms will
occur. This is in contrast to patients with neurogenic claudication
where the symptoms occasionally occur at rest or at with highly
variable walking distances. Pain in neurogenic claudication can even
occur on standing.
Pain of vascular claudication gets relieved on stopping within few
minutes, and this resolution of pain occurs even if the patient simply
stops and stands in place. Patients with neurogenic claudication
usually have to sit down to relieve their pain. Neurogenic
claudication pain gets relieved by changing posture and leaning
forwards.
Patients with neurogenic claudication often can walk further on an
incline, whereas vascular claudication is marked worsened if the
patient is on an incline.
1225.
Which of the following is the most
conservative neck dissection -
 a) Supraomohyoid neck dissection

 b) Radical neck dissection

 c) Modified radical neck dissection

 d) All are conservative



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Supraomohyoid neck dissection
Selective neck dissection - Preservation of any of the levels I
through V during neck dissection is known as Selective neck
dissection - The principle behind preservation of certain nodal
groups is that specific primary sites preferentially drain their
lymphatics in a predictable pattern. Types of SND include the
supraomohyoid neck dissection, the lateral neck dissection, and the
posterolateral neck dissection.
1226.
Supraomohyoid dissection is a type of -
 a) Selective neck dissection

 b) Modified radical neck dissection

 c) Radical neck dissection

 d) Posterolateral dissection



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Selective neck dissection
Selective neck dissection - Preservation of any of the levels I
through V during neck dissection is known as Selective neck
dissection - The principle behind preservation of certain nodal
groups is that specific primary sites preferentially drain their
lymphatics in a predictable pattern. Types of SND include the
supraomohyoid neck dissection, the lateral neck dissection, and the
posterolateral neck dissection.
1227. Alagille syndrome- all of the following
      are true except -
a) Mutation in JAG 1 And Notch2 gene are seen

b) Can Cause Autoimmune hepatitis

c) Autosomal Recessive Disease

d) Valvular anomalis of heart seen



Correct Answer - C
Answer C. Autosomal Recessive Disease
Autosomal dominant disease
JAG I and NOTCH 2 mutation
Affects the liver and Heart
Heart
Pulmonary stenosis
Tetralogy of Fallot
VSD
Overriding aorta
1228. Absence of Ultra hepatic bile duct leads
      to which syndrome?
 a) Von Meyenburg Complexes

 b) Polycystic Liver Disease

 c) Caroli Disease

 d) Alagille Syndrome



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Alagille Syndrome
It is an autosomal recessive condition characterized by absence of
bile ducts in portal tract Also called arterio hepatic dysplasia
Characteristic features:
Genetic disorder with vascular, biliary and other anomalies.
Absence of intrahepatic bile ducts with clinical severity ranging from
severe neonatal cholestasis mimicking biliary atresia to childhood
intermittent jaundice.
Progression to cirrhosis is rare.
1229. All of the following are premalignant
      conditions except -
 a) Bowen's Disease

 b) Senile Keratosis

 c) Xeroderma Pigmentosum

 d) Pyoderma Gangrenosum



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Pyoderma Gangrenosum
Bowen's Disease    Lupus vulgaris
                   Long standing chronic ulcer (e.g. marjolin's
Actinic Keratosis
                   ulcers)
Xeroderma
                   Following burn, venous ulcer, old scar etc.
pigmentosum
Senile Keratosis
1230. Adson's test is positive in -
 a) Cervical rib

 b) Cervical spondylosis

 c) Cervical fracture

 d) Cervical dislocation



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Cervical rib

Adson's test is a provocative test for Thoracic Outlet Syndrome
accompanied by compression of the Subclavian artery by a cervical
rib or tightened anterior and middle scalene muscles.
1231. Chimeric chemotherapy is being
      investigated for the treatment of which
      malignancy ?
 a) Leukemia

 b) Renal Cell Carcinoma

 c) CA Pancreas

 d) Glioblastoma Multiforme



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Leukemia
Artificial T cell receptors (also known as chimeric T cell receptors,
chimeric immunoreceptors, chimeric antigen receptors (CARs)) are
engineered receptors, which graft an arbitrary specificity onto an
immune effector cell. Typically, these receptors are used to graft the
specificity of a monoclonal antibody onto a T cell.
Two CAR-T therapies have been granted three total FDA approval
for the treatment of patients with hematologic malignancies.
The most advanced data to date concern CAR T therapies for the
treatment of patients with multiple myeloma and chronic lymphocytic
leukemia.
Among the first studies investigating anti-CD19 CAR T therapeutic
efficacy was a case report treating a patient with CLL.
1232. Anterior Mediastinal nodes are included
      in which level of lymphnodes -
 a) I

 b) III

 c) V

 d) VII



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. VII
Levels of neck lymphnodes
Level I, submental and submandibular group
Level II, upper jugular group
Level III, middle jugular group
Level IV, lower jugular group
Level V, posterior trian- gle group
Level VI, anterior compartment.
Level VII, anterior and superior mediastinal
1233. In Celiac artery compression syndrome
      which structure is the main cause of
      compression -
 a) Median Arcuate Ligament

 b) Rectus Sheath

 c) Deep Inferior Epigastric artery

 d) Lacunar Ligament



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Median Arcuate Ligament
Median arcuate ligament syndrome (MALS, also known as celiac
artery compression syndrome, celiac axis syndrome, celiac trunk
compression syndrome or Dunbar syndrome) is a condition
characterized byabdominal pain attributed to compression of the
celiac artery and possibly the celiac ganglia by the median arcuate
ligament.
The abdominal pain may be related to meals, may be accompanied
by weight loss, and may be associated with an abdominal bruit
heard by a clinician. It is also called celiac artery compression
syndrome.
1234. Which Is False about stress urinary
      incontinence -
 a) More common in men

 b) It occurs during increased abdominal pressure

 c) It is due to weakening of pelvic floor muscles

 d) Prostate surgery may be a cause



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. More common in men
Leaking urine upon sudden increase in abdominal pressure.
It is most common type in women.
Causes are
Weakening of pelvic floor muscles / urethra / sphincter muscles.
BPH, CA prostate or prostate surgery.
1235. Which of the following urethral anomaly
      is the most common -
 a) Hypospadias

 b) Pin hole meatus

 c) Epispadias

 d) Stricture urethra



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Hypospadias
Hypospadias is a condition in which the urethral meatus opens on
the underside of penis* or the perineum (i.e. ventral surface of penis)
proximal to the tip of the glans penis.
Hypospadias is the most common* congenital malformation of the
urethra. (also know that the most common congenital malformatio of
the urinary tract is Duplication of renal pelvis*)
Occurs in 1:250 male births.
1236. Which of the following types of shock
      wiil usually have warm peripheral
      extremities ?
 a) Hypovolemic Shock

 b) Neurogenic Shock

 c) Cardiogenic Shock

 d) Anaphylactic Shock



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Neurogenic Shock
Bradycardia
Hypothermia
Loss of sympathetic tone --> arterious & venous vasodilation
Warm and dry skin (the heart rate slows down, as well as warm, dry,
and flushed skin due to venous pooling secondary to loss of
vascular tone)
Others all shock have cold extremities (anaphylatic, cardiogenic and
hypovolemic)
1237. Antibiotic prophylaxis is best given -
 a) 1 day before surgery

 b) 2 hours before surgery

 c) Before the time of incision

 d) Only postoperatively



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Before the time of incision
About prophylactic antibiotics points to know are ? By definition
prophylaxis is limited to the time prior to and during the operative
procedure.
be most effective the prophylactic antibiotic agent should be
administered intravenously before the incision is made so that the
tissue levels are present at the time the wound is created and
exposed to the bacterial contamination.
1238. Which of the following is a feature of
      crush syndrome -
a) Hypokalemia

b) Hypercalcemia

c) Myoglobinuria

d) Hypophosphatemia



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Myoglobinuria
Features of crush syndrome :
Hyperkalemia
Hypocalcemia
Hyperphosphatemia
Hyperuricemia
Lactic acidosis
Myoglobinuria
Increased BUN & creatinine.
1239. Crush Syndrome is associated with all
      of the following features except -
a) Hypercalcemia

b) Hyperkalemia

c) Increased serum creatinine

d) Myoglobinuria



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Hypercalcemia
Features of crush syndrome :
Hyperkalemia
Hypocalcemia
Hyperphosphatemia
Hyperuricemia
Lactic acidosis
Myoglobinuria
Increased BUN & creatinine.
1240. Which of the following stones are
      common with infection ?
 a) Struvite

 b) Xanthine Stones

 c) Cysteine stones

 d) Calcium Oxalate stones



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Struvite
Calcium phosphate can be combined with ammonium and
magnesium to form the triple phosphate calculus ie Calcium
amnomium magnesium phosphate also k/a struvite stones.
Smooth and dirty white and soltitary.
Seen in alkaline urine esp with proteus infection which split urea to
ammonia.
1241. All the features of membranous urethral
      injury except
 a) blood of meatus

 b) Retention of urine

 c) Pelvic fracture

 d) Perineal butterfly hematoma



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd'
1. Urethral rupture is also of two types:
a. Bulbar urethral injury - MC
b. Membranous urethral injury
2. Extravasation of urine (+ blood ) in bulbar urethral injury
a. It is a superficial extravasation.
 b. If the Buck's fascia remains intact, extravasation of blood and
urine are confined to the penile shaft. However disruption of Buck's
fascia allows extravasated contents into a space limited by colle's
fascia forms a scrotal and perineal butterfly hematoma which can
extend up the abdominal wall.
3. Extravasation of urine in Membranous urethral injury &
Extraperitoneal bladder rupture.
a. Extravasation is same in both
b. It is a deep extravasation
c. Urine extrvasates in the layers of the pelvic fascia and the
retroperitoneal tissues
d. Urine collects in the perivesical space.
e. The typical finding on cystogram is extravasation of contrast
material into the pelvis around the base of the bladder.
  1242. High Flying prostate is a sign of -
    a) Extraperitoneal Bladder rupture

    b) Intraperitoneal Bladder Rupture

    c) Membranous Urethral Injury

    d) Bulbar Urethral Injury



   Correct Answer - C
   Answer- C. Membranous Urethral Injury
   The prostate is attached to pubis by puboprostatic ligament and
   disruption of the puboprostatic ligament with a complete rupture of
   the urethra can lead to a floating prostate—Vermooten’s sign
   (high fly prostate).
   Based on ascending urethrogram, posterior urethral injury is
   classified as (McCallum-Colapinto classification).
1. Type I: Elongation of posterior urethra, but intact
2. Type II: Prostate “plucked off’’ membranous urethra
   with extravasation of urine above sphincter only—Floating prostate
   — Vermooten’s sign
3. Type III: Total disruption of the urethra with extravasation of
   urine both above and below the sphincter.
1243. BPH involves -
 a) Central zone

 b) Peripheral zone

 c) Transitional zone

 d) Prostate capsule



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Transitional zone
Carcinoma of prostate arises most commonly in the peripheral zone
Benign prostatic hyperplasia originates in the transition zone
BPH typically affects the submucous group of glands in the
transitional zone, forming a nodular enlargement.
Eventually, this overgrowth compresses the PZ glands into a false
capsule and causes the appearance of the typical 'lateral'lobes.
Ref- Bailey and Love Volume-1/ Edition 27th
1244. Prostate cancer that is limited to the
      capsule and not the urethra would be
      satged as -
 a) Tx

 b) T1

 c) T2

 d) T3



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. T2
1245. A 65 year old male presents with CA
      prostate. The tumour is limited to the
      capsule and it is palpable on PR
      examination. The patient is diagnosed
      as stage T1b. The best treatment would
      be -
 a) Radical prostatectomy

 b) Chemotherapy

 c) Palliative radiotherapy

 d) Orchidectomy



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Radical prostatectomy
T1b T1c, T2
Radical prostactectomy or radiotherapy
External beam radiotherapy- T1 or low T2 disease
Branchytherapy- low T1 disease
1246.
Which of the following Vitamin deficiency is seen in short bowel syndrome with ileal resection ?

 a) Vitamin K

 b) Vitamin B 12

 c) Vitamin B1

 d) Folic acid



Correct Answer - B
 Answer- B (Vitamin B12)
Short-bowel syndrome is a disorder clinically defined by
malabsorption, diarrhea, steatorrhea, fluid and electrolyte
disturbances, and malnutrition.
Changes seen in Terminal Ileal Resection
Malabsorption of bile salts and vitamin B12 (which are normally
absorbed in this region)
Vitamin B12 Malabsorption → Megaloblastic anemia
Bile salts Malabsorption → Unabsorbed bile salts escape into the
colon and stimulate fluid secretion from the colon → watery diarrhea
Decreased bile salts in the bile → Cholesterol gall stones
1247. If 90% of jejunum and ilium is removed
      then all of the following features will be
      seen excePt -
 a) Steatorrhoea

 b) Diarrhoea

 c) Weight gain

 d) Megaloblastic anemia



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Weight gain
Changes seen in Terminal ileal resection
Resection of terminal ileum results in malabsorption of bile salts and
Vit. B12 which are normally absorbed in this region
Vit BIZ Malabsorption : Megaloblastic anemia
Bile salts malabsorption :- Unabsorbed bile salts escape into colon
where they stimulate fluid secretion from the colon, resulting in
watery diarrhoea.
Reduction in bile salt pool lead to steatorrhea and malabsorption of
fat soluble vitamins (due to malabsorption of fat).
Unabsorbed fatty acids bind with calcium, and thus lead to increased
concentration of free oxalates (oxalates bind with calcium normally
and therefore escape without intestinal absorption) Free oxalates
are absorbed. Increased conc. of body oxalates lead to oxalate
kidney stones.
1248. Perihepatic fibrosis occurring in Fitz
      Hugh Curtis Syndrome is due to -
 a) Pelvic Inflammatory Disease

 b) Bile Duct Injry

 c) Chronic Alcoholism

 d) Viral Hepatitis



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Pelvic Inflammatory Disease
It is thought to result from direct intraperitoneal spread of infection
towards the perihepatic region from initial pelvic
inflammation/infection
Trichomonas vaginalis, Ureaplasma urealyticum and Mycoplasma
hominis may also cause FHCS.
1249. What is the T/t of pt with carcinoid
      tumor of appendix of size more than 2
      cm -
 a) Right hemicolectomy

 b) Appendicectomy

 c) Appendicectomy + abdominal CT scan

 d) Appendicectomy + 24 hrs urinary HIAA



Correct Answer - A
Ans is 'a' ie. Right hemicolectiomy
1250. A 25 year old male is receiving
      conservative management for an
      appendicular mass since 3 days now
      presents with a rising pulse rate,
      tachycardia and fever. The mode of
      management must be -
 a) Ochsner sherren regimen

 b) Continue conservative management

 c) Proceed to laparotomy and appendicectomy

 d) Intravenous antibiotics



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Proceed to laparotomy and appendicectomy
If an appendix mass is present and the condition of the patient is
satisfactory, the standard treatment is the conservative Ochsner–
Sherren regimen.
10-20% need emergency operation due to spreading infection.
1251. Under what guidelines is treatment
      started for a patient presenting with
      appendicular mass on CT Scan ?
 a) Ochsner Sherren Regimen

 b) Conservative management and discharge

 c) Immediate Laprotomy

 d) Kocher's Regimen



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Ochsner Sherren Regimen
Ochsner Sherren regimen is the expectant management giving to a
patient with an appendix mass. It is expectant because it is expected
that the symptoms and signs the patient presented with will improve
during the course of the management and the patient may later be
scheduled for elective/interval appendicectomy.
1252. Treatment of choice of mucinous
      carcinoma of Gall Bladder confined to
      the lamina propria is -
 a) Simple cholecystectomy

 b) Extended cholecystectomy

 c) Cholecystectomy with wedge resection of liver

 d) Chemotherapy only



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Simple cholecystectomy
Treatment-
Stage I and II - simple cholecystectomy
Stage III – cholecystectomy + adjacent hepatic resection (atleast
2cm depth) + regional lymphadenectomy
Poor prognosis
1253. Nigro Regimen is used for -
 a) Anal Carcinoma

 b) Rectal Carcinoma

 c) Sigmoid Colon Carcinoma

 d) Duodenal Carcinoma



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Anal Carcinoma
Nigro regimen refers to combined chemotherapy and radiotherapy
for primary treatment of malignant tumors of the anal canal.
1254. A 35 year old male came with jaundice,
      palpable mass in the right
      hypochondrium not associated with
      pain. The probable diagnosis is -
 a) Carcinoma Ampulla of Vater

 b) Acute cholecystitis

 c) Chronic Cholecystitis

 d) Chronic Pancreatitis



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Carcinoma Ampulla of Vater
Courvoisier's law states that in the presence of an enlarged gall
bladder which is nontender and accompanied with jaundice the
cause is unlikely to be gallstones. This is because gall stones are
formed over a longer period of time, and this result in a shrunken,
fibrotic gall bladder which does not distend easily.
1255. A 60 year male presented with jaundice,
      pale stools, dark urine and mass in the
      epigastric region. Which of the
      following diagnosis in unlikely ?
 a) Pancreatic cancer

 b) Biliary Cancer

 c) Periampullary Cancer

 d) Chronic Cholecystitis



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Chronic Cholecystitis
Chronic cholecystitis is characterized by repeated attacks of pain
(biliary colic) that occur when gallstones periodically block the cystic
duct.
    1256. All of the following may lead to a gall
          bladder carcinoma except -
     a) Gall Bladder Polyps

     b) Typhoid carriers

     c) Exposure to carcinogens like nitrosamine

     d) Echinococcus Granulosus Infection



    Correct Answer - D
    Answer- D. Echinococcus Granulosus Infection
    Risk factors for gall bladder
 1. Gall stones
 2. Adenomatous gall bladder polyps (particularly polyps larger than 10
    mm)
 3. Calcified (porcelain) gallbladder
 4. Choledochalcyst
 5. Estrogens
 6. Anomalouspancreaticobiliaryductjunction
 7. Exposure to carcinogens (azotoulene, nitrosamine)
 8. Typhoid carriers
 9. Sclerosingcholangitis
10. Cholecystoenteric fistula
1257. All of the following are false for Gall
      Bladder carcinoma except:
      March 2005
 a) Carries a good prognosis

 b) Gallstones may be a predisposing factor

 c) Commonly squamous cell carcinoma

 d) Jaundice is rare



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B: Gallstones may be a predisposing factor
Primary carcinoma of the gallbladder is an uncommon, aggressive
malignancy that affects women more frequently than men.
Older age groups are most often affected, and coexisting gallstones
are present in the vast majority of cases.
The symptoms at presentation are vague and are most often related
to adjacent organ invasion. Imaging studies may reveal a mass
replacing the normal gallbladder, diffuse or focal thickening of the
gallbladder wall, or a polypoid mass within the gallbladder lumen.
Adjacent organ invasion, most commonly involving the liver, is
typically present at diagnosis, as is biliary obstruction. Periportal and
peripancreatic lymphadenopathy, hematogenous metastases, and
peritoneal metastases may also be seen. The vast majority of
gallbladder carcinomas are adenocarcinomas.
Because most patients present with advanced disease, the
prognosis is poor.
The radiologic differential diagnosis includes the more frequently
encountered inflammatory conditions of the gallbladder,
xanthogranulomatous cholecystitis, adenomyomatosis, other
hepatobiliary malignancies, and metastatic disease.
hepatobiliary malignancies, and metastatic disease.
The prevalence of lymphatic spread is high in gallbladder carcinoma.
Lymphatic metastases progress from the gallbladder fossa through
the hepatoduodenal ligament to nodal stations near the head of the
pancreas.
Three pathways of lymphatic drainage have been suggested: the
cholecystoretropancreatic pathway, the cholecystoceliac pathway,
and the cholecystomesenteric pathway.
The cystic and pericholedochal lymph nodes are the most commonly
involved at surgery and are a critical pathway to involvement of the
celiac, superior mesenteric, and para-aortic lymph nodes.
1258. Which of the following stoma is formed
      in Hartman's procedure ?
 a) End Colostomy

 b) End Iliostomy

 c) Loop Iliostomy

 d) Caecostomy



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. End Colostomy
Hartman's procedure
This is a compromise type of resection in which the rectum and/or
sigmoid colon are resected and an end colostomy done.
Anastomosis and perineal dissection of the distal rectum and
perineum are not done.
1259. Most common site of colorectal
      carcinoma is -
 a) Rectum

 b) Sigmoid Colon

 c) Ascending Colon

 d) Descending Colon



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Rectum
Rectosigmoid region is the most common site for colorectal
carcinoma. Rectum is involved in 38% of cases and sigmoid colon is
involved in 21% cases.
1260. Ainjection.
         patient undergoing a minor surgical procedure is given lignocaine



           Assertion: Local anaesthetics acts by blocking nerve conduction.

           Reason: Small fibers and non myelinated fibers are blocked more easily
           than large myelinated fibers.

 a) Both Assertion and Reason are true, and Reason is the correct
    explanation for Assertion

 b) Both Assertion and Reason are true, and Reason is not the
    correct explanation for Assertion

 c) Assertion is true, but Reason is false

 d) Assertion is false, but Reason is true



Correct Answer - B
Local anaesthetics blocks nerve conduction by decreasing the entry of sodium ions during
upstroke of action potential.
Finally it blocks depolarization to reach threshold potential and conduction block occurs.
Small fibers are more sensitive to local anaesthetics than large fibers and non myelinated
fibers are blocked easily than myelinated fibers.

Ref: Essentials of Medical Pharmacology by K D Tripathi, 5th Edition, Pages 321-3
1261. Which of the following is not true about
      Boerhaave syndrome?
 a) Perforation of the esophagus due to barotrauma

 b) Most common site is left posteromedial aspect 3 - 5 cms above
    the gastroesophageal junction

 c) Pain is the early manifestation

 d) Most cases follow a bout of heavy eating or drinking



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Most common site is left posteromedial aspect 3 - 5
cms above the gastroesophageal junction
Vomiting is thought to be the most common cause, other causes
include weightlifting, defecation, epileptic seizures, abdominal
trauma, compressed air injury, and childbirth, all of which can
increase the pressure in the esophagus and cause a barogenic
esophageal rupture.
Two common risk factors include alcoholism and excessive
indulgence in food.
Rupture occurs most commonly in the left posterolateral wall of the
distal third of the esophagus with extension into the left pleural
cavity.
Symptoms consist of vomiting, lower thoracic pain, and
subcutaneous emphysema.
Typically, the patient will present with pain at the site of perforation,
usually in the neck, chest, epigastric region, or upper abdomen.
1262. Which of the following is true about
      Mallory Weiss tear -
 a) It is a mucosal tear not extending through the muscle layer

 b) It is more common in women than men

 c) It is common in young individuals

 d) It is associated with achalasia cardia



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. It is a mucosal tear not extending through the
muscle layer
A Mallory -Weiss tear (MWT) is forceful or retching vomiting may
produce a longitudinal mucosal tear immediately below squamo
columnar junction at the cardia or gastroesophageal junction mainly
and also in oesophagus.
Seen in males, alcholics and pregnant females.
The mean age is more than 60 and 80% are men.
Hyperemesis gravidarum, which is severe morning sickness
associated with vomiting and retching in pregnancy, is also a known
cause of Mallory-Weiss tear.
   1263. Gastric carcinoma is associated with all
         EXCEPT ?
    a) Inactivation of p53

    b) Over expression of C-erb

    c) Over expression of C-met

    d) Activation of RAS



   Correct Answer - D
   Ans. is 'd' Activation of RAS
   In the course of multi-step stomach carcinogenesis, various genetic
   and epigenetic alterations of oncogenes, tumor-suppressor genes,
   DNA repair genes, cell cycle regulators and cell adhesion molecules
   are involved. Genetic alteration in gastric cancer include:
   Intestinal type gastric cancer: K-ras mutation, APC mutation, pS2
   methylation, HMLH1 methylation, p I ema methylation, p 73 deletion
   and C-erb B-2 amplification.
1. Diffuse type gastric caner: CDH I gene (E-Cadherin) mutation, K-
   sam amplification.
2. For both type: Telomerase reduction (telomerase shortening),
   hTERT expression, genetic instability, overexpression of the cyclin E
   & CDC25B & E2F I genes,p53 mutations, reduced expression,
   CD44 aberrabont transcripts, and amplification of the C-met Cyclin E
   genes.
   Coming to question:
   All the given four genetic alterations may be associated with
   stomach cancer.
   However among the given options K-ras is best answer as it is
   associated with gastric cancer in minimum percentage (amongst
   given options):
   Source: Textbook of mechanism of carcinogenesis and cancer
Source: Textbook of mechanism of carcinogenesis and cancer
prevention
K-ras mutation        -4 <10%
p53 mutation             30-60%
C-erb B-2 amplifcation-->20%
C-met amplifciation -->20%
1264. A 55 year old woman presented with
      history of recurrent episodes of right
      upper abdominal pain for the last one
      year. She presented to emergency with
      history of jaundice and fever for 2 days.
      On examination, the patient appeared
      toxic and had a blood pressure of
      100/60 mmHg. She was started on
      intravenous antibiotics. Ultrasound of
      the abdomen showed presence of
      stones in the common bile duct. What
      would be the best treatment option for
      her -
 a) ERCP and bile duct stone extraction

 b) Laparoscopic cholecystectomy

 c) Open surgery and bile duct stone extraction

 d) Lithotripsy



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. ERCP and bile duct stone extraction
Methods of biliary decompression
a. ERCP with sphincterotomy and stone extraction
It is the procedure of choice,
Early endoscopy allows not only diagnosis by cholangiography and
direct visualization of the ampulla but also permits biliary
decompression by sphincterotomy and stone extraction.
If the stones cannot be removed, a nasobiliary catheter or stent is
inserted to decompress the biliary tract.
b. Percutaneous transhepatic route (PTC)
PTC is performed if
The endoscopic procedure has failed or not available.
If the obstruction is more proximal or perihilar.
If there is a stricture in a biliary enteric anastomosis.
c. Surgical biliary decompression
1265. Rigler's sign is suggestive of -
 a) Pneumothorax

 b) Pneumoperitoneum

 c) Peritonitis

 d) Hemothorax



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Pneumoperitoneum
Both sides of bowel become visible because of free gas on an
abdominal x-ray. This is known as Rigler's Sign.
1266. What is the most common position of appendix?
 a) Pelvic

 b) Paracolic

 c) Retrocaecal

 d) Retroperitoneal



Correct Answer - C
Retrocecal is the most common position of the appendix.
Positions of appendix:
Retrocecal: 74%
Subcecal: 1.5%
Pelvic: 21%
Post-ileal: 0.5%
Pre-ileal/retro-ileal: 1%
1267. A 70 year pld male complaining of per
      rectal bleeding was diagnosed of
      having rectal/anorectal cancer. The
      distal margin of the tumor was 5 cm
      from the anal verge the treatment of
      choice would be -
 a) Palliative Radiotherapy

 b) Abdominoperineal recection

 c) Low anterior resection

 d) Local Excision



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Low anterior resection
Surgeries
Pre-operative neo-adjuvant radiotherapy in resectable rectal cancer
reduces the incidence of local recurrence
Adjuvant chemotherapy improves survival in node-positive cases
Anterior(low) resection: sphincter saving procedure, mid rectum
Proximal 2/3rdof rectum(lesions 6cms above the dentate line/2 or
more cms above anal canal)
Well differentiated tumour size tumour
T1/T2,NO tumours
Recto sigmoid tumors and upper third rectal tumors :High anterior
resection (rectum and mesorectum are taken to a margin 5cm distal
to the tumour and colorectal anastomosis is performed)
Tumours in the middle and lower thirds of rectum: complete removal
of rectum and mesorectum (TME-total mesorectal excision)
Abdomino perineal resection(Mike's procedure)- Lower rectum
Hartmann's procedure – for elderly and unstable patients who
cannot withstand long procedure of APR
Colonoscopy is always performed either before (for synchronous
tumours) or within a few months (for metachronous tumours) of
surgical resection for tumour detection
1268. All of the following are true about
      Hirschsprung disease except -
 a) Absence of Ganglion cells in the involved segment

 b) Swenson, Duhamel and Soave are surgical procedures for this
    condition

 c) Mainly presents in infancy

 d) The non peristaltic affected segment is dialted



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. The non peristaltic affected segment is dialted
In Hirchprung's disease the absence of ganglion cells gives rise to a
contracted non peristaltic segment with a dilated hypertrophied
segment of normal colon above it.
Almost all cases present in infancy and childhood. Approximately
half are diagnosed in the neonatal period and most of the remainder
are diagnosed in early childhood.
In the newborn period, most common symptoms are abdominal
distention and failure to passmeconium.
Older patients may experience chronic or intermittent constipation.
Occasionally, infants may present with a dramatic complication of
Hirschprung's disease called enterocolitis.
Surgery is always required. The basic principle is removal of most or
all of the aganglionic segment and anastomosing the ganglionic
bowel to the rectum
1269. Commonest cause of intussusception
      is -
 a) Submucous lipoma

 b) Meckel's diverticulum

 c) Hypertrophy of submucous peyer's patches

 d) Polyp



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Hypertrophy of submucosa peyer's patches
1270. All of the following are clinical features
      suggestive of trachea-esophagal fistula
      except -
 a) Choking and Coughing

 b) Regurgitation

 c) Cyanosis

 d) Fever



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Fever
Repeated episodes of coughing, choking and cyanosis occur on
feeding with TOF.
1271. Most important presenting feature of
      periampullary carcinoma is -
 a) Jaundice

 b) Pain

 c) Weight Loss

 d) Palpable Mass



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A
Hallmark of presentation of periampullary carcinoma is obstructive
Jaundice.
Jaundice secondary to obstruction of the distal bile duct is the most
common symptom that draws attention to ampullary and pancreatic
head tumors.
It is characteristically painless jaundice but may be associated with
nausea and epigastric discomfort.
1272. Best marker to assess prognosis after
      Surgery for colon carcinoma:
      March 2005
 a) CA 19-9

 b) CA-125

 c) Alpha fetoprotein

 d) CEA



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D: CEA
CEA is a family of related glycoproteins initially found in embryonic
tissue and colon malignancies.
The half-life of CEA is approximately 2 weeks. Plasma levels of CEA
can be determined readily by radioimmunoassay. However, its
usefulness in colon carcinogenesis screening is limited because of
its high level in the plasma of a patient's malignancies originating
from other sites such as breast, pancreas, stomach and lung.
Furthermore, CEA plasma levels may also be increased in smokers
or patients with chronic diseases, such as inflammatory bowel
disease, bronchitis and alcoholic liver disease.
The clinical usefulness of CEA for screening purposes is further
limited by the fact that its increase in level typically occurs only when
the tumor penetrates through the serosa. Thus, early lesions may
not be detected by serum CEA level changes. CEA is typically
elevated with metastatic liver disease, but rarely with peritoneal
involvement. Thus, while the specificity for CEA to identify occult
CRCs is high, the sensitivity is low in most studies for screening.
Accordingly, CEA is not a useful test for the screening of CRC.
Regardless of the clinicopathologic stage, a preoperative elevation
Regardless of the clinicopathologic stage, a preoperative elevation
of the plasma CEA level predicts eventual tumour recurrence.
High level of CA 19-9 is seen in the plasma of a patient's
malignancies originating from colon, breast and pancreas
1273. Acute pancreatitis causes all of the
      following except:
      March 2005, March 2013 (g)
 a) Hypercalcemia

 b) Increased amylase level

 c) Subcutaneous fat necrosis

 d) Hyperlipidemia



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A: Hypercalcemia
Complications of acute pancreatitis:
Intra-abdominal:
Pancreatic "collections":
Phlegmon
Pseudocyst
Abscess
Necrosis
Intestinal:
Paralytic ileus
Gastrointestinal haemorrhage - from stress ulceration, gastric
varices due to splenic vein obstruction, or rupture of
pseudoaneurysm
Necrotising obstruction or fistulisation of colon
* Hepatic - obstructive jaundice due to oedematous narrowing of
common bile duct
 * Renal - hydronephrosis and hydroureter of right kidney due to
peripancreatic inflammation in perirenal space
* Spleen - rupture or haematoma, from spread of peripancreatic
inflammation
Systemic complications range from minor pyrexia to rapidly
fatal, multiple organ-system failure. They include:
* Circulatory shock - kinin activation, haemorrhage
 * Disseminated intravascular coagulation
  * Respiratory insufficiency:
Mild e.g. hypoxaemia, atelectasis, pleural effusion
Severe e.g. adult respiratory distress syndrome
* Acute renal failure
* Metabolic:
Hypocalcaemia
Hyperglycaemia / diabetes mellitus
Hypertriglyceridaemia
* Pancreatic encephalopathy - confusions, delusions, coma
* Retinal arteriolar obstruction causing sudden blindness
Purtscher's retinopathy
* Metastatic fat necrosis A serum level three to four times above
normal serum amylase level, is indicative of acute pancreatitis, but a
normal level does not exclude the disease.
1274. Heller's myotomy is done for:
      September 2007, 2009, 2010
 a) Esophageal carcinoma

 b) Pyloric hypertrophy

 c) Achalasia cardia

 d) Inguinal hernia



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C: Achalasia cardia
Achalasia is associated with loss of ganglion cells in the esophageal
myenteric plexus.
These important inhibitory neurons induce LES relaxation and
coordinate proximal-to-distal peristaltic contraction of the esophagus
Achalasia is an esophageal motor disorder characterized by
increased lower esophageal sphincter (LES) pressure, diminished-
to-absent peristalsis in the distal portion of the esophagus composed
of smooth muscle, and lack of a coordinated LES relaxation in
response to swallowing.
Barium radiology may show 'bird's beak' appearance.
Esophageal (Heller) myotomy is a surgical procedure that is
performed with minimally invasive techniques. The laparoscopic
approach appears to be most appropriate.
1275. All of the following are surgical options
      in management of esophageal
      carcinoma except -
a) Ivor Lewis Approach

b) Mckeown's Approach

c) Transhiatal removal

d) Sistrunk operation



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Sistrunk operation
Ivor lewis operation is subtotal esophagectomy done for Ca
esophagus in lower third of esophagus
In transhiatal esophagectomy (THE) Esophagus is removed through
the diaphragmatic hiatus by making incisions in the abdomen and
the neck.
McKeowns Surgery- 3 Incision Approach
1276. Bilateral parotid enlargement occurs in
      all, Except:
 a) Sjogren's syndrome

 b) SLE

 c) HIV

 d) Chronic pancreatitis



Correct Answer - B
Answer is B (SLE):
Bilateral parotid enlargement is not a feature of SLE.
Causes of Bilateral parotid enlargement
            Viral         Metabolic
                                        Endocrinal     Miscellaneous
     infections              causes
•     Mumps        • Diabetes        • Acromegaly    • Sarcoidosis
•     Influenza    • mellitus        • Gonadal       • Amyloidosis
•     Epstein      • Hyper             hypofunction • Sjogren
barr virus         • lipoproteinemia                   syndrome
•     Coxackie       Chronic
virus A              pancreatitise
•     CMV            Cirrhosis
•     HIV
1277. Chronic hemolytic anaemia is
      associated with which of the following -
 a) Brown Pigment stone of the gall bladder

 b) Black Pigment stone of the gall bladder

 c) Uric acid Renal Calculus

 d) Intestinal Obstruction



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Black Pigment stone of the gall bladder
Hemolysis causes black pigment stone of gall bladder.
Chronic hemolytic states (eg. hereditary spherocytosis, sickle cell
disease).
1278. All of the following are features of
      Zollinger Ellison syndrome except
 a) Intractable peptic ulcers

 b) Severe diarrhoea

 c) Beta cell tumors of the pancreas

 d) Very high acid output.



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Beta cell tumours of pancrease
Gastrinoma or Zollinger Ellison syndrome is a non 13 cell
neuroendocrine tumour of the pancreas It secretes gastrin
Pathophysiology of Gastrinoma
Gastrinoma —> Increase secretion of gastrin —> marked gastric
acid hypersecretion peptic ulcer
Pancreatic Neuroendocrine Tumors
Tumour            Biologically Tumour
                       active location      Malignant Main symptoms
                      peptide              percentage and signs
                    secreted
Gastrinoma                                                              -
(non 13 cell                                          •Pain         (79
                               Duodenum
tumour)                                               100%)
                               (70%)
                                                                        -
                               Pancreas
                      Gastrin                   60-90 'Diarrhoea (30
                               (25%)
                                                      73%)
                               other sites
                                                      • GERD        (30-
                               (5%)
                                                      35%)
                                                      • Peptic ulcer
                         Pancreas >
                         99%                    • Symptoms of
                         (Insulinomas           hypoglycemia
Insulinoma
                         are                    • Symptoms
(f3 cell         Insulin                   < 10
                         distributed            releive on
tumour)
                         equally on             administration of
                         head body              glucose
                         and tail of
                         pancrease)
                                                • Watery
                                                diarrhoea
VIPOMA                                          (90-100%)
(Verner-                                        •               -
Morrison     Vasoactive                         Hypokalemia (80
                          Pancreas
syndrome,      intestinal                 40-70 100%)
                          90%
pancreatic       peptide                        •
cholera,                                        Hypochlorhydria
WDHA)                                           • Dehydration
                                                (83%)
                                                • Flushing (20%)
                        Pancreas                • Dermatitis
                        100%                    (migratory
                        (usually                necrolytic
                        occursusuall            erythema)
                        singly in               67-90%
                        pancreatic              • Glucose
                        tail)                   intolerance
                                                (40-90%)
Glucagonoma Glucagon                    50-80%
                                                • Weight loss (66
                                                to 96%)
                                                • Anemia (33-
                                                85%)
                                                • Diarrhoea (15-
                                                29%)
                                                •
                                                Thromboembolism
1279. All of the following is true about heart
      transplantation except -
 a) Immmunosupression is started preoperatively

 b) It is only orthotopic and not heterotopic

 c) A Beating heart cadaver/donor is needed

 d) High Pulmonary arterial resistance in a contra indication



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. It is only orthotopic and not heterotopic
Types of transplant :
Heterotopic
Orthotopic
A typical heart transplantation begins when a suitable donor heart is
identified. The heart comes from a recently deceased or brain dead
donor, also called a beating heart cadaver.
1280. Lateral aberrant thyroid refers to -
 a) Congenital thyroid abnormality

 b) Metastatic focus in lymph nodes

 c) Struma ovarii

 d) Lingual thyroid



Correct Answer - B
Ans is "B" i.e. Metastatic focus in lymph nodes
Lateral aberrant thyroid refers to a metastatic focus in lymph
nodes.
Lateral aberrant thyroid is a misnomer and always refers to the
presence of metastatic thyroid carcinoma (papillary) in cervical
lymph nodes. It does not indicate the presence of ectopic thyroid
tissue as the name suggests.
1281. A child presented with blunt abdominal
      trauma, the first investigation to be
      done is -
 a) USG

 b) CT Scan

 c) Complete Hemogram

 d) Abdominal Xray



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. USG
U/S is the investigation of choice in both stable as well as unstable
patients.
  1282. Vacuum assisted closure is
        contraindicated in which of the
        following conditions -
    a) Chronic osteomyelitis

    b) Large amount of necrotic tissue with eschar

    c) Abdominal wound

    d) Surgical wound dehiscence



   Correct Answer - B
   Answer- B. Large amount of necrotic tissue with eschar
   Negative-pressure wound therapy (NPWT), also known as a vacuum
   dressing or V.A.C. dressing ("vacuum assisted closure"), is
   a therapeutic technique using a suction dressing to remove
   excess exudation and promote healing in acute or chronic
   wounds and second- and third-degree burns.
   Contraindications for NPWT use
1. Malignancy in the wound
2. Untreated Osteomyelitis
3. Non enteric and unexplored fistulas
4. Necrotic tissue with eschar present
5. Exposed blood vessels, anastomotic sites, organs and nerves in the
   periwound area (must avoid direct foam contact with these
   structures)
1283. True regarding cystic hygroma is -
 a) Non transilluminant

 b) Lined by columnar epithelium epithelium

 c) Develops from jugular lymphatic sequestration

 d) All



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is c i.e., Develops from jugular lymphatic sequestration
Cystic hygroma
Cystic hygroma is a swelling usually occuring in the lower third of the
neck
It is most commonly seen in posterior triangle of the neck, but may
also occur in axilla, groin & mediastinum
It results due to sequestration of a portion of the jugular lymph sac
from the lymphatic system.
It usually manifests in the neonate or in early infancy (occasionally
present at birth)
The swelling is soft and partially compressible and invariably
increases in size when the child coughs or cries.
The characteristic that distinguishes it from all other neck swellings
is that it is brilliantly translucent.
The cysts are filled with clear lymph and are lined by endothelium.
Mostly these are multiple cysts but occasionally they can be
unilocular.
It may show spontaneous regression.
Treatment [Ref.: Sabiston 18/e p2053; Schwartz 9/e p1415]
There are two methods of treatment: Surgical excision &
Sclerotherapy
Sabiston writes- "Complete surgical excision is the preferred
treatment; however, this may be impossible because of the hygroma
infiltrating within and around important neurovascular structures.
Because hygromas are not neoplastic tumors, radical resection with
removal of major blood vessels and nerves is not indicated.
Injection of sclerosing agents such as bleomycin or the derivative of
Streptococcus pvogenes OK-432 have also been reported to be
effective in the management of cystic hygromas. Intracystic injection
of sclerosants appears to be most effective for macrocystic
hygromas, as opposed to the microcystic variety."
"The modern management of most cystic hygromas includes the
combination of surgical excision and image-guided sclerotherapy."-
Schwartz
1284. Most common site for Cystic Hygroma
      is -
 a) Lower third of neck

 b) Overlying the parotid gland

 c) Along the Zygomatic Prominence

 d) Post auricular



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Lower third of the neck
Most cystic hygromas involve the lymphatic jugular sacs and present
in the posterior neck region.
The other common sites are the axillary, mediastinum, inguinal, and
retroperitoneal regions, and approximately 50% of them present at
birth.
Cystic hygromas usually present as soft cystic masses that distort
the surrounding anatomy, including the airway, which can result in
acute airway obstruction.
1285. The size beyond which the risk of
      rupture of an abdominal aneurysm
      significantly increases is greater than -
a) 5.5 cm

b) 6 cm

c) 6.5 cm

d) 7 cm



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. 5.5 cm
High risk AAA
Endovascular aneurysmal repair (EVAR)
AAA repair- ≥5.5 cm/ >5cm females
Symptomatic aneurysm
1286. Chvostek sign could be seen after -
 a) Gastrojejunostomy

 b) Total thyroidectomy

 c) Subtotal Thyroidectomy

 d) Hellers Cardiomyotomy



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Total thyroidectomy
Chvostek's sign refers to the contraction of the ipsilateral facial
muscles on percussion of the facial nerve below the zygoma.
It is due to hypocalcemia and one common cause of hypocalcemia
is a complication during thyroidectomies.
The parathyroid gland produces a parathyroid hormone (PTH), and
resection can lead to a decrease in PTH levels.
PTH regulates calcium levels in the body; hence, a reduction in its
serum level will lead to hypocalcemia.
So, among the most common postoperative complications following
thyroid surgery is hypocalcemia.
1287. Reactionary Hemorrhage occurs due to
      -
a) Dislodgement of clot

b) Infection

c) Damage to a blood vessel

d) Pressure necrosis



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Dislodgement of clot
Dislodgement of clot
Ligature slip
Noramlisation of BP and
vasodilation
1288. Transplanted kidney is relocated to
      which region in the recepient's body ?
 a) Retroperitoneal rgion

 b) Lumbar region

 c) Epigastrium

 d) Beside the dysfunctional Kidney



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Retroperitoneal rgion
The most common location for placing a kidney transplant is in
retroperitoneal iliac fossai.
In most cases Kidney is placed retroperitoneally and the iliac arteries
and veins are used for perfusion and ureter is transplanted directly
into bladder.
1289. Claudication due to popliteofemoral
      incompetence is primary seen in
 a) Thigh

 b) Calf

 c) Buttocks

 d) Feet



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Calf
Aorta and Common Iliac- Buttocks
Femoral Artery- Thigh
Superficial femoral artery- Calf and popliteal artery
Posterior tibial Artery- Feet
1290. Which of the following is correct
      management of abdominal
      compartment syndrome
 a) Antihypertensives

 b) Urgent Opening of the surgical wound and application of the
    Bogota bag

 c) Urgent Fasciotomy

 d) Wait and monitor for 24 hours



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Urgent Opening of the surgical wound and
application of the Bogota bag
Abdominal compartment syndrome is a surgical emergency and
treatment includes rapid decompression of the elevated
intraabdominal pressure by opening the abdominal wound and
performing a temporary closure of the abdominal wall with mesh or a
plastic bag. Permanent closure is done 5 to 7 days later when the
condition resolves.
1291. All of the following is true about
      congenital hypertrophic pyloric
      stenosis except
 a) RamStedt Pyloromyotomy is the treatment of choice

 b) Non Bilious vomiting is seen

 c) Metabolic acidosis occurs

 d) More common in males



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Metabolic acidosis occurs
Characterstically the first born male child is affected.
The conditon is most commonly seen at 4 weeks after birth ranging
from the 3rd week to on rare occasion
Non-bilious vomiting, becoming increasingly projectile, occurs over
several days to weeks
Infants develop a metabolic alkalosis with severe depletion of
potassium and chloride ions.
Treatment- Surgery : Fredet-Ramstedt pyloromyotomy. (In it the
pyloric mass is split without cutting the mucosa)
1292. Food can commonly get obstructed in
      the esophagus at all of the following
      locations except
a) Crossing of left bronchus

b) Crossing of arch of aorta

c) Diagphragmatic aperture

d) Crossing of the hemiazygous vein



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Crossing of the hemiazygous vein
Pharyngoesophagal junction -6 inches 9
1293. A full thickness wound that is not
      sutured heals by
 a) Primary Healing

 b) Secondary Healing

 c) Delayed primary Healing

 d) Reepithelization



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Secondary Healing
Secondary Healing
A third type of healing is known as secondary healing or healing by
secondary intention. In this type of healing, a full-thickness wound is
allowed to close and heal. Secondary healing results in an
inflammatory response that is more intense than with primary wound
healing. In addition, a larger quantity of granulomatous tissue is
fabricated because of the need for wound closure. Secondary
healing results in pronounced contraction of wounds.
1294. An Incisional wound heals by
 a) Primary Healing

 b) Secondary Healing

 c) Delayed primary Healing

 d) Reepithelization



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Primary Healing
Primary Healing
Primary wound healing or healing by first intention occurs within
hours of repairing a full-thickness surgical incision. This surgical
insult results in the mortality of a minimal number of cellular
constituents.
1295. A cystic mass at the base of umbilical
      cord in a neonate could be
 a) Allantoic Cyst

 b) Meckel's Diverticulum

 c) Ventral mesogastrium

 d) Cystic Hygroma



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Allantoic Cyst
Allantoic cysts are a type of true cyst of the umbilical cord.
The allantois forms from the part of the fetal yolk sac that eventually
becomes the primitive hindgut (the cloaca). The cloaca divides into
the hindgut posteriorly and the urogenital sinus anteriorly.
1296. True about MALToma is
 a) They are secondary gastric lymphomas

 b) H. Pylori infection is a risk factor

 c) Commonly seen in gastric cardia

 d) They are a type of T cell lymphoma



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. H. Pylori infection is a risk factor
Stomach is the most common extranodal site of lymphoma.
It is of two types - Primary & Secondary
Most of the primary lymphomas (about 60%) arise in MALT (mucosa
associated lymphoid tissue). MALT is usually associated with
chronic H. pylori infection. So low-grade MALT lymphomas are
thought to arise because of chronic H. pylori infection. These low
grade lymphomas may later on degenerate to high grade
lymphomas.
mucosa associated lymphoid tissue. It is usually primary GI
lymphoma (4% of gastric lymphoma); of non-Hodgkin’s B cell
type.
1297. False about Gastric lymphoma is:
 a) Stomach is the most common site

 b) Asosciate with H. pylori infection

 c) Total gastrectomy with adjuvant chemotherapy is the treatment
    of choice

 d) 5 yr survival rate after treatment is 60%.



Correct Answer - C
Total gastrectomy with adjuvant chemotherapy is the treatment of
choice [Ref: Sabiston 18/e p1269 (17/c p1312); Harrison 17/e, p
573; Schwartz 9/e p935 (8/e, p981)]
Stomach is the most common extranodal site of lymphoma.
It is of two types - Primary & Secondary
Primary gastric lymphoma - is lymphoma of the stomach which
exhibits no evidence of liver, spleen, mediastinal lymph nodes or
bone marrow involvement at the time of diagnosis (regional lymph
node involvement may be present)
Primary gastric lymphoma is mainly (>95%) Non-Hodgkin's
lymphoma of B cell origin.
Most of the primary lymphomas (about 60%) arise in MALT (mucosa
associated lymphoid tissue). MALT is usually associated with
chronic H. pylori infection. So low-grade MALT lymphomas are
thought to arise because of chronic H. pylori infection. These low
grade lymphomas may later on degenerate to high grade
lymphomas
Immunodeficiency and H. pylori infection are risk factors for B cell
lymphoma.
Most common site of involvement (like that of adenocarcinoma) is
gastric antrum.
Secondary gastric lymphoma
Stomach is the most common extranodal site of systemic lymphoma.
Almost all of them are Non-Hodgkins types
Treatment
The role of gastric resection is controversial. Recent studies have
shown similar disease free 5 year survival rates in patients treated
with surgery+chemotherapy+radiotherapy and patients treated with
chemotherapy+ radiation therapy alone. (Most patients with high
grade gastric lymphomas are now treated with chemoradiation
alone, without surgical resection. For disease limited to the stomach
and regional nodes, radical subtotal gastrectomy may be performed,
especially for bulky tumors with bleeding and/or obstruction.)
Most common chemotherapeutic regimen is – CHOP plus rituximab
[CHOP stands for cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin,vincristine,&
prednisone]
about option d i.e. (5 yr survival rate after treatment is 60%.)
Harrison 17/e writes- "Subtotal gastrectomy, usually followed by
combination chemotherapy, has led to 5-year survival rates of 40-
60% in patients with localized high-grade lymphomas."
1298. Which of the following gas is most commonly used in laproscopy?
 a) CO2

 b) N2O

 c) O2

 d) Helium



Correct Answer - A
CO2 is used in laproscopy because it is common to the human body
and can be absorbed by tissue and removed by the respiratory
system.
 It is also non-flammable, which is important because electrosurgical
devices are commonly used in laparoscopic procedures.
1299. Strawberry gallbladder is seen in ?
 a) Gangrene of gallbladder

 b) Porcelain gall bladder

 c) Adenomatosis

 d) Cholesterosis



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is' i.e. Cholesterosis
Cholecystosis is the chronic inflammatory condition of the
gallbladder with cholesterol deposits.
Types
I. Aggregations of cholesterol crystals in the mucosa or submucosa
—cholesterosis (Strawberry gallbladder).
Lipoid contents are present in large foamy cells that have
phagocytosed cholesterol. Here cystic duct is normal.
The disease occurs only in gallbladder. It is a premalignant
condition.
II. Cholesterol laden polypoid projections in the mucosa
— cholesterol polyposis (Gallbladder polyp).
III. Granulomatous thickening and hyperplasia of the gallbladder
— cholecystitis glandularis proliferans.
IV. Diverticula formation in the wall of the gallbladder— diverticulosis
of gallbladder.
V. Gallbladder wall fistula.
1300. All of the following are causes of
      Urothelial Carcinomas Except -
 a) Smoking

 b) Industrial solvents

 c) Exposure to thorotrast

 d) Alcohol consumption



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Alcohol consumption
Industrial dyes or solvents
Excessive analgesic intake,
Balkan nephropathy, and
Those exposed to Thorotrast, (a contrast agent previously used for
retrograde pyelography
1301. In a patient with renal cell carcinoma
      with a thrombus in IVC renal vein,
      which is the best investigation for
      diagnosis?
 a) CT scan

 b) Angiography

 c) Colour doppler imaging

 d) IVP



Correct Answer - A
Ans. CT scan
Investigation of choice in RCC-CT scan.
  1302. Which of the following precancerous
        conditions if treated would not lead to
        cancer
    a) Cervical intraepithelial Neoplasia

    b) Ductal carcinoma in situ of breast

    c) Lobular Carcinoma in situ of breast

    d) Vaginal intraepithelial Neoplasia



   Correct Answer - A
   Answer- A. Cervical intraepithelial Neoplasia
   The cancers, which have well known precancerous condition, can be
   diagnosed and treated at pre-cancerous stage to prevent the
   development of cancer : -
1. Cervix → GIN
2. Colon → Polyp
   1303. Commonest site of peptic ulcer is :
    a) 1st part of Duodenum

    b) IInd part of duodenum

    c) Distal 1/3 of stomach

    d) Pylorus of the stomach



   Correct Answer - A
   Answer is A (1st part of Duodenum)
   First part of duodenum is the most common site for peptic ulceration.
   Sites in order of decreasing frequency :
1. Duodenum, 1st portionQ
2. Stomach, usually antrum Q
3. At the gastro-esophageal junction, in the setting of
   gastroesophageal reflux Q
4. Within the margins of a gastrojejunostomy Q
5. In the duodenum, stomoch or jejunum of patients with Zollinger-
   Ellison Syndrome Q
6. Within or adjacent to a Meckels diverticulum that contains ectopic
   gastric mucosa Q
   Peptic ulcers are usually solitary lesions less than 4 cm in diameter
1304. Which of the following is the agent of choice for cryosurgery?
 a) Nitrous oxide

 b) CO2 snow

 c) Liquid nitrogen spray

 d) Freons



Correct Answer - C
This has a temperature of -196 c(spray/probe) & the only cryogen advocated for malignant
skin lesions.
Ref: Textbook of dermatosurgery & cosmetology, satish S savant, E-2,P-117.
1305. In case of polytrauma with multiple
      injuries to the chest, neck and
      abdomen, highest priority is given to
 a) Stabilization of cervical spine

 b) Staring of koids

 c) Vasopressors

 d) Assesing disability



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Stabilization of cervical spine
1. Primary survey - it should be done first when any polytrauma
patient presents in the following order :
1.1 Airway maintenance with cervical spine protection
1.2 Breathing and ventilation
1.3 Circulation with hemorrhage control
1.4 Disability/Neurologic assessment
1.5 Exposure and environmental control
2. Secondary survey - complete history and examination.
1306. Thyroid nodule in a 65 year old male
      who is clinically euthyroid is most likely
      to be
 a) Follicular adenoma

 b) Follicular Carcinoma

 c) Thyroid Cyst

 d) Multinodular goiter



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Follicular adenoma
Most common solitary thyroid nodule is benign colloid nodule.
2"d most common cause of solitary thyroid nodule is follicular
adenoma.
1307. In Subtotal Thyroidectomy, What is
      true
 a) Removal of one lobe and isthmus

 b) Removal of both lobes leaving behind 6-8 grams of tissue

 c) Removal of entire thyroid with cervical lymphnodes

 d) Removal of 1 lobe with isthmus and the second lobe partially



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Removal of both lobes leaving behind 6-8 grams of
tissue
Subtotal thyroidectomy—Removal of majority of both lobes leaving
behind 4-5 grams (equivalent to the size of a normal thyroid gland)
of thyroid tissue on one or both sides—this used to be the most
common operation for multinodular goitre.
1308. Which of the following statements
      about Branchial cysts is true:
 a) 50-70% are seen in lungs

 b) Most common site is mediastinum

 c) They are premalignant lesions

 d) Infection is uncommon in Pulmonary bronchogenic cysts



Correct Answer - B
Answer is B (Most common site is mediastinum):
Most common site of bronchial/bronchogenic cysts is mediastinum.
Only about 15% of bronchogenic cysts occur in the lungs
(pulmonary bronchial cysts). Pulmonary bronchogenic cysts often
become infected. Bronchogenic cysts are benign lesion and do not
have malignant potential (not premalignant).
Bronchial Cyst/Bronchogenic cysts: Review
Bronchial cysts represent islands of bronchial tissue left behind
during the branching of the airways during early fetal development.
They arise due to abnormal budding of the tracheobronchial tree and
foregut and are lined by bronchial epithelium.
The most common site of bronchial cysts is mediastinum.
The other site of bronchial cyst is within the pulmonary parenchyma
(lung) (Less common site - 15%)
  Mediastinal bronchial cyst
Pulmonary parenchymal cyst (lungs)
Most common site for            Less common site (- 15%)
bronchial cysts                 Most common site is the lower
Most common site is middle lobes
mediastinum                     Commonly arise when bronchial
Commonly arise when             tissue is separated from airways
bronchial tissue is             late in gestation
separated from airways early    Communication with
in gestation                    tracheobronchial tree is more
Communication with              common than with mediastinal
tracheobronchial tree is rare   cysts.
                                These cysts often become infected.

Most bronchogenic cysts are asymptomatic and discovered as
incidental radiographic findings in a young adult.
When symptoms do occur they result most commonly from infection.
Pulmonary parenchymal cysts often become infected – Rudolph
Bronchogenic cysts are not considered premalignant lesions.
However according to Rudolph's textbook there is a small risk of
malignant change and the best approach is removal and histological
examination.
1309. A 65 year old female presents with a
      swelling in the neck diagnosed as a
      solitary thyroid nodule. The patient is
      investigated and a scan shows
      increased uptake of iodine. Serum T3
      and T4 are elevated . Most probabe
      diagnosis is
 a) Benign Colloid Nodule

 b) Toxic Adenoma

 c) Follicular adenoma

 d) Toxic Multinodular goitre



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Toxic Adenoma
Elavated thyroid hormone levels with a hyperfunctioning nodule is
suggestive of a toxic adenoma.
A cold nodule is more likely to be malignant then a hot nodule.
1310. Most common cause of goiter in India
      is
 a) Diffuse Endemic Goitre

 b) Papillary Carcinoma

 c) Toxic Multinodular Goitre

 d) Hashimoto's Thyroiditis



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Diffuse Endemic Goitre
The lack of the iodine leads to decreased synthesis of thyroid
hormones and a compensatory increase in TSH, which in turn leads
to follicular cell hypertrophy and hyperplasia and goitrous
enlargement - Diffuse hyperplastic goiter.
Mostly patients are euthyroid.
1311. Which of the following is an indication
      for thoracotomy in case of hemothorax
      ?
 a) Persistant drainage of 250 ml/hr

 b) Total output of 1000m1 of blood

 c) Falling blood pressure

 d) Shift of mediastimum to the opposite side



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Persistant drainage of 250 ml/hr
It is classified according to the amount of blood.
Minimal hemothorax 350 ml
Moderate hemothorax 350-1500 ml
Massive hemothorax 1500 ml or more
Total hemorrhagic output exceeds 1500 ml of blood
1312. A 40 year old male with chest trauma
      presents with breathlessness,
      decreased respiratory sounds on the
      right side, hyperresonance on
      percussion and distended neck veins.
      The possible diagnosis is
 a) Tension Pneumothorax

 b) Cardiac Tamonade

 c) Flail Chest

 d) Myocardial Infarction



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Tension Pneumothorax
Tension pneumothorax occurs when air becomes trapped in the
pleural space under pressure.
It develops when a 'one-way valve' air leak occurs either from the
lung or through the chest wall.
causes are
Penetrating chest trauma,
Blunt chest trauma,
Iatrogenic lung punctures (e.g. due to subclavian central
venepuncture) and
Mechanical positive-pressure ventilation
Clinical
Clinical signs and symptoms include dyspnea, tachypnea,
hypotension, diaphoresis, and distended neck veins.
1313. A 40 year old male presented with a
      penetrating trauma to chest. He is
      dyspnoeic with distended neck veins
      with hypotension and mediastinum is
      shifted to opposite side. There is a
      sucking wound over the chest. The
      most appropriate management would
      be
 a) Insertion of a large bore needle in the 2" ICS in the mid
    clavicular line

 b) Fluid Resuscitation

 c) Starting Inotropic support

 d) Endotracheal Intubation



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Insertion of a large bore needle in the 2" ICS in the
mid clavicular line
This is a case of tension pneumothorax.
Treatment consists of immediate decompression, initially by rapid
insertion of a large-bore needle into the second intercostal space in
the midcalvicular line of the affected hemithorax, and then followed
by insertion of a chest tube through the fifth intercostal space in the
anterior axillary line.
1314. Which of the following stages of lip
      carcinoma do not have nodal
      involvement ?
 a) T2N1

 b) T3NO

 c) T1N1

 d) T2N2



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. T3NO
1315. All of the following may lead to
      pneumatocele formation except
 a) Staphylococcal pneumonia

 b) Positive pressure ventilation

 c) Hydrocarbon inhalation

 d) ARDS



Correct Answer - D
Answer-D
Pneumatocele formation occurs as a sequela to acute pneumonia,
commonly caused by Staphylococcus aureus. However,
pneumatocele formation also occurs with other agents, including
Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae, Escherichia
coli, group A streptococci, Serratia marcescens, Klebsiella
pneumonia, adenovirus, and tuberculosis.
Noninfectious etiologies include hydrocarbon ingestion, trauma, and
positive pressure ventilation.
In premature infants with respiratory distress syndrome,
pneumatoceles result mostly from ventilator-induced lung injury.
1316. A 54 year old woman is diagnosed as
      having carcinoma of the renal pelvis of
      size less than 4 cm without any
      metastasis. The best treatment option
      is
 a) Partial nephrectomy

 b) Radical Nephrectomy

 c) Chemotherapy and immunaotherapy

 d) Palliative Radiotherapy



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Partial nephrectomy
Partial nephrectomy is now being used as primary surgical therapy
for patients with tumour less than 4 cm in size, earlier Radical
nephrectomy was the t/t of choice for tumor of any size.
1317. Ainhum is seen in ?
 a) Base of great toe

 b) Base of fingers tips

 c) Base of toe

 d) Ankle



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Base of Toe
Ainhum : is a condition usually affecting Negro males (but some
females) who have run barefoot in child hood.
Clinical Features : A fissure appears at interphalangeal joint of toe -
usually the fifth.
This fissure becomes a fibrous band, encircles the digit and causes
necrosis.
1318. The investigation of choice for
      dysphagia is
 a) Endoscopy

 b) Manometric Study

 c) Ct Scan

 d) Barium Swallow



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Endoscopy
The investigation of choice in is endoscopy.
Barium swallow is the first investigation.
1319. Most common precipitant of Raynaud's
      phenomenon is
 a) Exposure to cold

 b) Exposure to heat

 c) Psychosocial triggers

 d) Exertion



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Exposure to cold
Is ds of young women (F:M ratio is 5:1)
Commonly the upper limbs are affected specially the fingers (the
thumb is generally escaped)
Exposure to cold is main trigger
1320. All of the following are principles of
      negative pressure wound therapy
      except
 a) Stabilization of wound environment

 b) Clearance of infection

 c) Macrodeformation of the wound

 d) Decreased edema



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Clearance of infection
Four primary effects of NPWT on wound healing:
Macro-deformation - drawing the wound edges together leading to
contraction.
Stabilisation of the wound environment-ensuring it is protected from
outside microorganisms in a warm and moist environment.
Reduced oedema - with removal of soft tissue exudates.
Micro-deformation- leading to cellular proliferation on the wound
surface.
1321. Which is the main contraindication for a
      liver biopsy?
 a) Thrombocytopenia

 b) Hemangioma

 c) Ascites

 d) All



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D
Contraindications for liver biopsy include the following:
Increased prothrombin time (PT), international normalized ratio
(INR) greater than 1.6
Thrombocytopenia, platelet count lower than 60,000/μL
Ascites ( transjugular route preferred) [10]
Difficult body habitus (transjugular route preferred)
Suspected hemangioma
Suspected echinococcal infection
Uncooperative patient
1322. Aneurysmal dilation of the small bowel
      is seen in
 a) Small bowel Lymphoma

 b) Gall Stone Ileus

 c) Duodenal Atresia

 d) Sjogrens Syndrome



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Small bowel Lymphoma
Aneurysmal dilatation: 30%, it occurs due to replacement of
muscularis by tumour or infiltration of myenteric nerve plexus
Despite the extensive involvement, small bowel obstruction is
uncommon because of lack of desmoplastic reaction, and
perforation is rare
1323. Spontaneous esophageal rupture is
      most common in
 a) Below the diagphragmatic aperture

 b) Pharyngoesophagal junction

 c) Above the diagphragmatic aperture

 d) At the crossing of the arch of aorta



Correct Answer - C
Answer C. Above the diagphragmatic aperture
Instrumental perforation is common in the pharynx or distal
esophagus.
Spontaneous rupture may occur just above the diaphragm in the
posterolateral wall of the esophagus.
1324. What is the treatment of choice in
      desmoid tumors ?
 a) Irradiation

 b) Wide excision

 c) Local excision

 d) Local excision following radiation



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Wide excision
1325. True about Dentigerous cyst:
 a) Arises in relation to unerupted teeth

 b) It most commonly encroaches maxillary antrum

 c) Mandibular third molar is common site

 d) Common in mandible

 e) All



Correct Answer - A:C:D
Answer- A,Arises in relation to unerupted teeth C,Mandibular
third molar is common site D,Common in mandible
Common in lower jaw (mandible) in women 30-40 years.
It occurs in relation to unerupted, permanent, molar tooth, most
commonly the upper or lower third molar.
1326. A patient presents with difficulty with
      swallowing liquids but not solids. The
      best investigation to make a diagnosis
      is
 a) Endoscopy

 b) Endoscopic ultrasound

 c) Manometry

 d) PET CT



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Manometry
H/O of dysphagia with more to liquids than solids suggests achalasia
cardia. In all other obstructive causes of esophagus, dysphagia for
solids is seen first
Manometry is used for diagnosis.
1327. Which of the following is true about
      menetrier's disease
 a) It is premalignant condition

 b) There is increased gastric acid secretion

 c) Atrophied mucosal folds are seen

 d) Affects the stomach and small intestines



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. It is premalignant condition
Ménétrier disease is a rare, acquired, premalignant disease of the
stomach characterized by massive gastric folds, excessive mucous
production with resultant protein loss, and little or no acid production.
The disorder is associated with excessive secretion of transforming
growth factor alpha (TGF-α).
1328. All are resected in whipples operation
      except ?
 a) Duodenum

 b) Head of pancreas

 c) Neck of pancreas

 d) Common bile duct



Correct Answer - C
Ans is 'c'
Whipples operation (Pancreaticoduodenectomy)
is the most commonly performed operation for carcinoma of head of
pancreas.
It includes resection of:
- distal stomach            - duodenum
- gall bladder              - proximal jejunum
- CBD                     - regional lymphatics
- head of pancreas
Restoration of gastrointestinal continuity requires -
pancreaticojejunostomy choledochojejunostomy &
- gastrojejunostomy
   1329. CA Breast may locally spread to all of
         the following muscles except
    a) Pectoralis Major

    b) Pectoralis Minor

    c) Latissimus Dorsi

    d) Serratus Anterior



   Correct Answer - C
   Answer- C. Latissimus Dorsi
   latissimus Dorsi is used for breast reconstruction and may rarely be
   involved in CA Breast local Spread'
   Muscles involved in breast cancer
1. Pectoral muscles : Pectoralis major, Pectoralis minor.
2. Muscles of chest wall : Intercostal muscles, serratus anterior
1330. Which is the most common type of male
      breast cancer?
 a) Infiltrating Ductal Carcinoma

 b) Lobular Carcinoma

 c) Mucinous Carcinoma

 d) Colloid Carcinoma



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Infiltrating Ductal Carcinoma
It tends to present as a lump and is most commonly an infiltrating
ductal carcinoma.
More than 90% of cases are infiltrating duct carcinoma, about 10%
are ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS).
The known predisposing causes include gynecomastia and excess
endogenous or exogenous estrogen.
1331. In Patey's mastectomy the step not
      done is
 a) Nipple and areola removed

 b) Surrounding normal tissue of tumor is removed.

 c) Pectoralis major removed

 d) Pectoralis minor removed



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e. (Pectoralis major removed)
Lets see the nomenclature of various surgeries on breast
Simple or Total mastectomy
* it removes all breast tissue, the nipple-areola complex, and skin.
Extended simple mastectomy
* Simple mastectomy + removal of level I axillary lymph nodes.
Modified radical mastectomy
it removes all breast tissue, the nipple-areola complex, skin and
the level I and level II axillary lymph nodes.
Halstead's Radical mastectomy
removes all breast tissue and skin, the nipple areola complex,
the pectoralis major and minor muscles and the level I, II and
III axillary lymph nodes.
Modified Radical Mastectomy
Two forms of modified radical mastectomy are in use
Auchincloss (pronounced as 'aushincloss') procedure
* Here both the pectoralis major and minor muscles are preserved
with removal of level I and II axillary lymph nodes
Patey's Procedure
here the pectoralis minor muscle is removed to allow complete
dissection of level III axillary lymph nodes
Scanlon's modification of Patey's procedure
* here the pectoralis minor muscle is divided instead of removing.
Division of pectoralis minor muscle allows complete removal of
level III lymph nodes
Halstead Radical Mastectomy
In this operation following structures are removed.
i)       the whole breast
ii)    the portion of skin overlying the tumor, which includes the
nipple-areola complex.
iii) the subcutaneous fat and the deep fascia vertically from the
lower border of the clavicle upto the upper quarter of the sheath of
the rectus abdominis and horizontally from the strenum to the
anterior border of lattissimus dorsi
iv) pectoralis major muscle
v)      pectoralis minor muscle and clavipectoral fascia
vi) upper part of the aponeurosis of the external oblique and
anterior parts of a few digitations of the serratus anterior muscle
vii) all fatty and loose areolar tissue along with level I, II & III
axillary lymph nodes
Structures saved are :
i)       the axillary vein and the cephalic vein
ii)    the long thoracic nerve of Bell (Nerve to serratus anterior).
The nerve to latissimus dorsi may be sacrified if required.
Also know
Extended Radical Mastectomy - Radical mastectomy + removal of
internal mammary lymph nodes
Super Radical Mastectomy - Radical mastectomy + removal of
internal mammary, mediastinal and supraclavicular lymph nodes.
   1332. 45 year old female underwent modified
         radical mastectomy with axillary
         clearance for CA breast. After surgery
         she could not lift her arm above head.
         Which nerve is likely to be injured ?
    a) Intercostobrachial nerve

    b) Long thorasic nerve of Bell

    c) Nerve to latissimus Dorsi

    d) Lateral Pectoral nerve



   Correct Answer - B
   Answer- B. Long thorasic nerve of Bell
   Overhead abduction is caused by :-
1. Serratus anterior : supplied by long thoracic nerve.
2. Trapezius : supplied by spinal accessory nerve.
1333. A 22 year old woman comes with a non
      progressive mass in a left breast since
      6 months. There are no associated
      symptoms. Examination shows a
      mobile mass not attached to the
      overlying skin or underlying tissue. The
      possible diagnosis is
 a) Fibroadenoma

 b) Cystasarcoma Phylloides

 c) Scirrhous Carcinoma

 d) Fibroadenosis



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Fibroadenoma
Clinically, they present as firm masses that are easily movable.
(MOUSE IN THE BREAST) They slide easily under the examining
fingers and may be lobulated or smooth.
Mammography is of little help in discriminating between cysts and
fibroadenomas; however, ultrasonography can readily distinguish
between them because each has specific characteristics.
FNA biopsy can also be used to confirm the imaging findings
1334. Most common location of breast cancer
      is
 a) Lower inner quadrant

 b) Nipple

 c) Upper inner quadrant

 d) Upper outer quadrant



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Upper outer quadrant
Breast cancer is found most frequently in the upper outer quadrant.
Least frequently in lower inner quadrant.
1335. A 55 years old male with a knoen
      history of gall stones presents with
      chief complints of severe abdominal
      pain and elevated levels of serum lipase
      with periumbilical ecchymosis. All of
      the following are prognostic criteria to
      predict severity of the condition
      except
a) Age

b) Serum LDH

c) Base deficit

d) Serum GGT



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Serum GGT
1336. All are true about carcinoma palate,
      except -
 a) Slow growing

 b) Bilateral lymphatic spread

 c) Adenocarcinoma

 d) Presents with pain



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Presents with pain
1337. A 45 year old lawyer presents with pain
      in the abdomen more so in the
      epigastric region that worsens with
      eating spicy food and is relieved by
      bending forward. Complications of the
      above mentioned condition could be all
      except
 a) Perforation

 b) Bleeding

 c) Gastric Outlet Obstruction

 d) Splenic Vein Thrombosis



Correct Answer - D
Ans. - D. Splenic Vein Thrombosis
Bleeding, perforation and gastric outlet obstruction are the
complications of peptic ulcer.
Perforation: This allows stomach contents to escape into the
peritoneum, causing peritonitis. It is more common in duodenal than
in gastric ulcers.
Gastric outlet obstruction: The most common cause is an ulcer near
the pylorus, but occasional cases are due to antral cancer or adult
hypertrophic pyloric stenosis.
Bleeding
1338. Which of the following is a tumour
      marker for bladder cancer ?
a) AFP

b) CEA

c) Bladder surface protein

d) Nuclear Matrix protein 22



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Nuclear Matrix protein 22
Tumour markers in CA Bladder
Nuclear matrix protein 22
BTA
TRAK
1339. RPLND and Chemotherapy may be used
      in management of
 a) Non seminomatous Germ cell tumours of testis

 b) Non germ cell tumours

 c) Seminomatous Germ cell tumours

 d) Lymphoma testis



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Non seminomatous Germ cell tumours of testis
RPLND retroperitoneal lymph node dissection
Extra gonadal Germ cell tumors Infrequently GCTs arise from an
extra gonadal site. They have poor prognosis. They are treated by
chemotherapy.
1340. All of the following testicular tumours
      are germ cell tumours EXCEPT:
      March 2013 (b)
 a) Seminoma

 b) Teratoma

 c) Choriocarcinoma

 d) Sertoli cell tumour



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D i.e. Sertoli cell tumour
Testicular carcinoma
Bilateral in 10% of cases,
Abdominal cryptorchid testes are at higher risk as compared to
inguinal cryptorchid testes
Testicular feminization syndrome increases the risk of testicular
germ cell tumour
MC Ca of testes in young: Seminoma
MC Ca in elderly: Lymphoma
MC Ca in infants: Yolk sac tumour
Seminoma
Radiosensitive,
Corresponds to dysgerminoma of ovary &
Treatment of choice is: Surgery
Germ Cell Tumors
Precursor lesion
Intratubular germ cell neoplasm, unclassified
Intratubular germ cell neoplasm, specific type
Tumors of 1 histologic type
Seminoma
Variant: Seminoma with syncytiotrophoblastic cells
Partially regressed tumor showing seminoma with scar
Spermatocytic seminomaEmbryonal carcinoma
Variant: Spermatocytic seminoma with a sarcomatous component

Yolk sac tumor
ChoriocarcinomaPlacental site trophoblastic tumor
Variant: "Monophasic" type

Trophoblastic tumor, unclassified
Teratoma
With a secondary somatic type malignant component
Monodermal variants
Carcinoid
Primitive neuroectodermal tumor
Others
1341. The Grayhack shunt is established
      between:
 a) Corpora cavernosa and dorsal vein

 b) Corpora cavernosa and saphenous vein

 c) Corpora cavernosa and glans

 d) Corpora cavernosa and corpora spongiosa



Correct Answer - B
Ans is 'b' i.e. Corpora cavernosa and saphenous vein
The Grayhack shunt is a surgical shunt between corpora cavernosa
and the saphenous vein done for the treatment of ischemic priapism.
Priapism is an uncommon condition of prolonged erection. It is
usually painful for the patient, and no sexual excitement or desire is
present.
Priapism may be classified into high- and low-flow types
(Nonischemic and ischemic).
Nonischemic (High flow) priapism:
Nonischemic priapism, also termed arterial or high-flow priapism,
features elevated vascular flow through the corpora cavernosa.
It usually occurs secondary to perineal trauma, which injures the
central penile arteries and results in loss of penile blood-flow
regulation.
Aspiration of penile blood for blood-gas determination demonstrates
high oxygen and normal carbondioxide levels.
Arteriography is useful to demonstrate aneurysms that will respond
to embolization.
Erectile function is usually preserved.
Ischemic (low-flow) priapism:
Ischemic priapism, also termed veno-occlusive or low-flow priapism,
features little or absent intracorporal blood flow. It represents a true
compartment syndrome involving the penis, needing emergency
management.
It is typically painful.
The corpora cavernosa is tense with congested blood and tender to
palpation. The glans penis and corpus spongiosum are soft and
uninvolved in the process.
The current theories regarding the mechanism of priapism remain in
debate, but most authorities believe the major abnormality to be
physiologic obstruction of the venous drainage. This obstruction
causes buildup of highly viscous, poorly oxygenated blood (low 02,
high CO2) within the corpora cavernosa.
If the process continues for several days, interstitial edema and
fibrosis of the corpora cavernosa will develop, causing impotence.
Treatment
Ischernic priapism is a urologic emergency.
- First-line treatment consists of aspiration of blood and irrigation of
the corpora cavernosa (via a needle put in the corpora cavernosa)
along with intracavernous injection of an a-adrenergic
sympathomimetic agent (phenylephrine) .(Sympathomimetic agents
can be expected to exert contractile effects on the cavernous tissue
and thus facilitate detumescence.)
- Surgical shunting is needed when the intracavernous treatment
fails.
A surgical shunt has the objective of facilitating blood drainage from
the corpora cavernosa, bypassing the veno​occlusive mechanism of
these structures. A variety of shunt procedures may be performed. A
distal cavernoglanular (corporoglanular) shunt is the first choice.
1342. Which of the following is false about
      undescended testis ?
 a) More common on the right side

 b) Hormonal therapy is effective

 c) Increased risk of malignancy

 d) Secondary sexual characteristics are normal



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Hormonal therapy is effective
In undescended testis - the testes is arrested in some part of its path
to the scrotum.
In Ectopic testis - the testis is abnormally placed outside its path.
Retractile testis - in infancy 80% of inapparent testis are retractile
testis and require no t/t.
Approx 70-77% of cryptorchid testes will spontaneously descend,
usually by 3 months of age.
More common in preterm, small for gestational age, LBW & twin
neonates.
More common on Rt. Side
Secondary sexual characterstics are normal
1343. A 45 year old male is diagnosed with
      carcinoma penis. The surgeon must
      look out for which lymphnodes
 a) Para aortic

 b) External iliac

 c) Internal Iliac

 d) Inguinal



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Inguinal
More than 50% of patients present with enlarged inguinal lymph
nodes (but half of these are reactive enlargement d/t sepsis).
The presence and the extent of metastasis to the inguinal region is
the most important prognostic factor for survival in patients with Ca
Penis.
1344. A 45 year old male presenting with
      penile cancer extending upto the glans
      penis is treated with
 a) Partial Penectomy with 2 cm margin

 b) Circumcision

 c) Partial penectomy with Inguinal nodes exploration

 d) Partial penectomy with 4 cm margin



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Partial Penectomy with 2 cm margin
The goal of t/t in invasive penile carcinomas is complete
excision with adequate margins:
a) For lesion involving the prepuce
Simple circumcision is effective.
b) For lesion of glans or distal shaft
Partial penectomy with a 2 cm margin (less aggressive surgical
resections such as Mohs micrographic surgery and local excisions
directed at penile preservation can be done).
c) For lesion involving the proximal shaft or when partial penectomy
results in a penile stump of insufficient length for sexual function or
directing the urinary stream
Total penectomy with perineal urethrostomy
1345. A young male presents with a testicular
      mass on the right side. The AFP is
      elevated while the HCG is normal. The
      most appropriate next step is
 a) Biopsy

 b) USG

 c) Orchidectomy

 d) Wait and Watch



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B
A painless testicular mass is pathognomic for a testicular
malignancy. USG of the testis is indicated whenever a testicular
malignancy is considered and for persistent or painful testicular
swelling.
1346. A 65 year old male presenting with
      acure pancreatitis is now having
      refractory hypoxia. The X RAY of chest
      would show
 a) Bilateral infiltrates

 b) Pneumatocoeles

 c) Ground glass appearances

 d) Hilar lymphadenopathy



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Bilateral infiltrates
Systemic complications of pancreatitis
Hypovolemic shock
DIC
ARDS
Diabetes
1347. All of the following are true about
      Nissen Fundoplication except
 a) It is done for GERD

 b) Reinforcment is done only in the anterior half

 c) Upper part of stomach is plicated around the lower esophagus

 d) It is done for paraesophagal hiatus hernia



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Reinforcment is done only in the anterior half
In a fundoplication, the gastric fundus (upper part) of the stomach is
wrapped, or plicated, around the lower end of the esophagus and
stitched in place, reinforcing the closing function of the lower
esophageal sphincter. The esophageal hiatus is also narrowed down
by sutures to prevent or treat concurrent hiatal hernia, in which the
fundus slides up through the enlargedesophageal hiatus of the
diaphragm.
In a Nissen fundoplication, also called a complete fundoplication, the
fundus is wrapped all the way 360 degrees around the esophagus.
1348. Congenital hydrocele is best t/t by -
 a) Eversion of sac

 b) Excision of sac

 c) Lords procedure

 d) herniotomy



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' ie. Herniotomy
Bailey writes ?
"Congenital hydrocele are a special form of indirect inguinal hernia
and are treated by herniotomy."
Congenital hydrocele
In this conditon the processus vaginalis remain patent so there is
direct communication of the tunica vaginalis with the peritoneal
cavity. The communicating orifice at the deep inguinal ring is too
small for the development of hernia.
It is present since birth*.
In contradication to assumption. congenital hydrocele is not easily
reducible* due to narrowness of the deep inguinal ring but when the
child lies supine, it disappears.
1349. False regarding hypernephroma is -
 a) Radiosensitive

 b) Arise from cortex usually from pre existing adenoma

 c) May present with rapidly developing varicocele

 d) Usually adenocarcinoma



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Radiosensitive
RCC or hypernephroma is one of the most radioresistant and
chemoresistant tumors.
In men rapidly developing varicocele is rare but impressive sign for
RCC occuring most often on the left side. It occurs because left
gonadal vein is obstructed where it joins the left renal vein.
As already stated RCC originates in the cortex and tends to grow out
into perinephric tissue causing characteristic bulge or mass effect.
About adenomas
Adenomas are the most common benign renal parenchymal lesions.
- Despite the classification of adenoma as a benign tumor, no
clinical, histologic or immunohistochemical criteria can differentiate
renal adenoma from renal carcinoma.
Smith's Urology writes about adenomas ?
- "Previously, all renal tumors less than 3 cm were considered
adenomas. However, even such small tumors can metastasize and
are now classified as renal cell carcinoma. Adenomas of any size
should be treated as a fortuitous finding representative of an early
renal cancer, and the patient should be evaluated and treated
appropriately."
1350. The Bipolar cautery is preferred over
      monopolar cautery in the following
      surgeries except
a) Hand Surgery

b) Surgery around Penis

c) Surgery of the Hip

d) Surgery around the face



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Surgery of the Hip
Bipolar cautery preferred in :
Hand surgery
Surgery around appendages like penis
Surgery around the face
1351. The posterior urethra is best visualized
      by ?
 a) Static cystogram

 b) Retrograde urethrogram

 c) Voiding cystogram

 d) CT cystogram



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Voiding Cystogram
Voiding cystourethrography is the best method to visualize posterior
urethra.
Remember,
Urethra can be imaged radiographically in two ways.
Anterograde techniques —>          Best for visualization of posterior
urethra. (This is done along with voiding cystourethrography or with
voiding following
excretory urography)
Retrograde technique              —>       Best for examining the
anterior (penile) urethra (Contrast is injected through tip of urethra).
1352. Early stage of non small cell lung
      cancer can be treated by
 a) Surgical resection

 b) Surgical resection with adjuvant chemotherapy

 c) Radiotherapy

 d) Immunotherapy



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Radiotherapy
Cystoscopy is endoscopy of the urinary bladder via the urethra. It is
carried out with a cystoscope.
1353. All of the following about
      Gastrointestinal carcinoid tumors are
      true, Except:
 a) Small intestine and appendix account for almost 60% of all
    gastrointestinal carcinoid

 b) 5 year survival for carcinoid tumors is >60%

 c) Rectum is spared

 d) Appendicial carcinoids are more common in females than
    males



Correct Answer - C
Ans is 'c' i.e. Rectum is spared
Rectum is not spared, but is infact a common site for carinoid tumor.
About other options:
5 year survival for carcinoid tumors is >60%
Sabiston writes-" Carcinoid tumors have the best prognosis of all
small bowel tumors, whether the disease is localized or metastatic.
Resection of a carcinoid tumor localized to its primary site
approaches a 100% survival rate. Five-year survival rates are about
65% among patients with regional disease and 25% to 35% among
those with distant metastasis."
Appendicial carcinoids are more common in females than males
"Appendicial carcinoids are more common in females. Two to three
cases of appendecial carcinoids are female."- Sleisenger and
Fordtran's Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease 8/e p609
        Small intestine and appendix account for almost 60% of all
gastrointestinal carcinoid
Data from various books vary but as far as the question goes this
can be taken to be true as option 'c' is definitely wrong. In GIT small
intestine and the appendix are the most common sites. Infact small
intestine is the 2nd most common site in body after bronchus.
[Note that several textbooks including Schwartz and Sabiston,
mention Appendix as the most common site of GI carcinoids, which
is not true according SEER data (given in Harrison)]
1354. Commonest infantile testicular tumour
      is ?
 a) Seminoma

 b) Teratoma

 c) Yolk sac tumor

 d) Dysgerminoma



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Yolk sac tumor
o Most common tumor of testis Seminoma.
o Most common tumor of testis in childhood ---> yolk sac tumor
(endodermal sinus tumor or infantile embryonal carcinoma).
1355. All of the following are true about the
      bare area of the liver except
 a) Infection can spread from the abdominal to thoracic cavity at
    this area

 b) It is not a site of portocaval anastomosis

 c) Formed by the reflections of coronary ligaments

 d) It is triangular in shape



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. It is not a site of portocaval anastomosis
The coronary ligaments represent reflections of the visceral
peritoneum covering the liver onto the diaphragm. As such, between
the two layers of the coronary ligament lies the bare area of the liver,
and is attached to the diaphragm byareolar tissue.
The bare area of the liver is still covered by Glisson's capsule, the
fibrous capsule that sheathes the entire liver.
Bare area is a site of portocaval anastomoses
1356. Which is the investigation of choice for
      staging of a lower limb sarcoma ?
 a) MRI

 b) CT Scan

 c) PET Scan

 d) PET CT



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. MRI
MRI : Investigation of choice for soft tissue sarcomas in extremities.
CT SCAN : Investigation of choice for retroperitoneal sarcomas.
  1357. Which of the following is an absorbable
        suture
   a) Polyglactin

   b) Silk

   c) Polyester

   d) Ethilon



   Correct Answer - A
   Answer- A. Polyglactin
   Absorbable sutures-
1. Catgut
2. Polyglactin
3. Polyglyconate
4. Polyglycolic acid
5. Polydioxanone
6. Poliglecaprone
1358. Polydiaxonone suture is normally
      absorbed in
 a) 2 weeks

 b) 4 weeks

 c) 6 weeks

 d) 6 months



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. 6 months
Retains 70% of its original tensile strength at 2 weeks, 50% at 4
weeks, and 25% at 6 weeks.
Prolonged dermal support for at least 6 months has been associated
with decreased scar spreading
1359. Most tissue reaction is seen with
 a) Plain Catgut

 b) Polydiaxonone

 c) Silk

 d) Chromic catgut



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Silk
Reaction to catgut depends on the stage of absorption and is mainly
histocytic in type. Nonabsorbable sutures are encapsulated by a rim
of connective tissue, while near the suture histocytes, giant cells and
lymphocytes are found. This is most marked with silk and cotton,
less so with Dacron, and least with nylon and wire.
1360. Trauma and Injury Severity Score
      (TRISS) includes:
a) GCS + BP + RR

b) RTS + ISS + Age

c) RTS + ISS + GCS

d) RTS + GCS + Age



Correct Answer - B
Ans is `b' i.e. RTS + ISS + Age
TRISS (Trauma and Injury Severity Score) :
Injury Severity Score
Revised Trauma Score
Age
Mechanism of Injury (blunt/penetrating)
1361. Which of the following is most
      malignant tumor?
 a) Glioblastoma Multiforme

 b) Meningioma

 c) Osteochondroma

 d) Giant cell tumor



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Glioblastoma Multiforme
Primary Brain Tumours
1. Gliomas (43%).
a. Astrocytomas are the commonest type. They are usually
malignant.
Grade I – Cystic
Grade II – Diffuse
Grade III –Anaplastic
Grade IV – Glioblastoma multiforme (MC)
2. Meningiomas (18%)
3. Schwannoma (8%)
4. Pituitary tumors (12%)
5. Craniopharyngiomas (5%)
6. Blood vessel tumors (2%)
Other tumors
They are pineal region tumors, pituitary adenomas,
craniopharyngiomas, choroid plexus tumors, etc.
1362. All of the following are medical uses of
      erythropoietin except -
 a) Treatment of anaemia associated with renal disease

 b) Chemotherapy induced anemia

 c) Anaemia Associated with Crohn's Disease

 d) Megaloblastic Anaemis



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Megaloblastic Anaemis
Uses of erythropoetin
Anaemia of renal failure.
Anaemia associated with chemotherapy for diseases like
mylodysplasia.
Anaemia associated with inflammatory bowel disease.
1363. Epulis arises from -
 a) Enamel

 b) Root of teeth

 c) Gingiva

 d) Pulp



Correct Answer - C
Answer is 'c' i.e. Gingiva
Epulis literally means 'upon the gum'. Thus it is a swelling situated
on the gum.
It can originate from the mucous membrane, the periosteum or the
bone giving rise to different varieties of Epulis.
1364.
Traumatic optic neuropathy due to closed
head trauma commonly affects which part of
optic nerve -
 a) Optic canal

 b) Intra ocular part

 c) Intracranial part

 d) Optic tract



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Optic canal
Indirect optic nerve injury
Studies have shown that forces applied to the frontal bone and
malar eminences are transferred and concentrated in the area near
the optic canal. The tight adherence of the optic nerve's dural sheath
to the periosteum within the optic canal is also thought to contribute
to this segment of the nerve being extremely susceptible to the
deformative stresses of the skull bones. Such injury leads to
ischemic injury to the retinal ganglion cells within the optic canal.
1365. IQ in mild mental retardation is
 a) 50-70

 b) 35-49

 c) 20-34

 d) < 20



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., 50-70
1366. What is the IQ of a borderline
      deficiency?
 a) 70 - 80

 b) 50 - 69

 c) 20 - 49

 d) 0 - 20



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. 70 - 80
IQ Range     IQ Classification
70 and Below Extremely Low
71 -79       Borderline
80 -89       Low Average
90 -110      Average
111 -120     Bright
121 -130     Very Bright
131 and Over Extremely Bright
1367. According to Wechsler intelligence
      scale scoring, average IQ of a normal
      child is:
 a) 50

 b) 75

 c) 90

 d) 111



Correct Answer - C
Ans. c. 90
1368. Which is false about development
      milestones at 6 months of age?
 a) Watching self in mirror

 b) Sitting in tripod position

 c) Pincer grasp

 d) Monosyllable sounds



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Watching self in mirror
Milestones at 6 months of age
In prone position lifts his head and greater part of his chest while
supporting weight on extended arms.
Produces monosyllable sounds like da, ma.
Enjoys watching his own image in the mirror.
Binocular vision develops (between 3-6 months).
Purposeful movements in space (6-8 months).
Sits in tripod position.
1369. At what age child begins to use past
      and present tense
 a) 1 Years

 b) 2 Years

 c) 18 Months

 d) 30 Months



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. 30 Months
Begin to identify objects from a group by their function and parts (ie.
"which one has wheels", "which one can we eat")
Begin to use verbs with "ing" endings (i.e. "eating");
Early concepts such as "big, little" are identified;
Child will use "no, not" and answer "where" questions
1370. Milestones at 1 year of age are all
      except
 a) Playing a simple ball game

 b) Using 2 words that are meaningful

 c) Spontaneous scribbling

 d) Walking upstairs 1 step at a time



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Walking upstairs 1 step at a time
Tries to remove his coat and attempts to wear his socks or shoes
without success.
Does mimicry.
Plays a simple ball game
Can use 2 words with meaning
Tries to build a Tower of 2 cubes
Tries to scribble spontaneously (between 12-24 months).
1371. Stranger anxiety develops at
 a) 3 months

 b) 4 months

 c) 7 months

 d) 11 months



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. 7 months
Milestones at month
Holds the objects with crude grasp from palm (palmar grasp)
Pivots
Shows strangers anxiety
Resists if a toy is pulled from his hand.
Babbles
1372. What is the average weight gain of the
      neonate per day
 a) 5-10 g

 b) 25-30 g

 c) 50-60g

 d) 100-150g



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. 25-30 g
They gain weight at a rate of approximately 25 to 30 gm per day for
the first 3 months of life. Thereafter they gain about 400 gm of
weight every month for the remaining part of first year.
[Ref Ghai 7th/e p. 6]
1373. Newborn loses how much weight in first
      week?
 a) 5 -10%

 b) 1-2%

 c) 10-20%

 d) None



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. 5 -10%
The average birth weight of neonates is about 3 Kg.
During first few days after birth, the newborn loses extracellular fluid
equivalent to about 10% of the body weight.
1374. A newborn baby has a head
      circumference of 35 ems. at birth, His
      optimal head circumference will be 43
      ems at -
 a) 4 months of age

 b) 6 months of age

 c) 8 months of age

 d) 12 months of age



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., 6 months of age
o At 6 month of age head circumference is between 40.0-43.5cm.
1375. "Potter's syndrome" is associated with -
 a) Renal anomalies

 b) Severe oligohydramnio's

 c) Flattened nose

 d) All the above



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., All of the above
Potter syndrome
Potter syndrome is characterized by -
i)      Bilateral renal agenesis
ii)     Pulmonary hypoplasia
iii)   Potter facies --> widely separated eyes with epicanthic folds,
low set ears, broad compressed flat nose, receding chin.
* This condition is incompatible with life, death occurs shortly after
birth from pulmonary hypoplasia.
* Maternal USG demonstrates -
i) Oligohydramnios                      ii) Nonvisulization of
bladder                       iii) Absent kidney
1376. What is the cardiothoracic ratio in
      children is -
 a) 30-35%

 b) 40-45%

 c) 50-55%

 d) 60-65%



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. 50-55%
" The cardiac silhouette occupies 50-55% of the chest width.
Cardiomegaly is present when the cardiothoracic (CT) ratio is more
than 55%."
1377. The fetal circulation changes to normal
      circulation at birth with
 a) Closure of patent ductus arteriosus

 b) Closure of ductus venosus

 c) Increased activity of right Ventricle

 d) Opening of fossa Ovalis



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Closure of patent ductus arteriosus
The increase in the concentration of oxygen in the blood leads to a
decrease in prostaglandins, causing closure of the ductus arteriosus.
These closures prevent blood from bypassing pulmonary circulation,
and therefore allow the neonate's blood to become oxygenated in
the newly operational lungs.
1378. Most common cause of pneumonia in
      early onset sepsis a neonate is
 a) Pnemococcus

 b) S. Pyogens

 c) E Coli

 d) S. Aureus



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. E Coli
Early onset sepsis
It is caused by organisms prevalent in the genital tract or in the labor
room and maternity operation theatre.
In the west it is mostly caused by group B streptococcus and E.coli.
In our country it is mostly due to gram negative organisms-E.coli,
ldebsiella and enterobactor sp.
1379. Neonatal resuscitation - which of the
      following drugs is used ?
a) Dopamine

b) Sodium Bicarbonate

c) Noradrenaline

d) Dobutamine



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Sodium Bicarbonate
Important drugs used for neonatal resuscitation are
Epinephrine (adrenaline),
Normal saline or ringer lactate,
Naloxone and
Soda bicarbonate.
1380. When does crying stop in cyanotic
      spells ?
 a) Forced Expiration

 b) Forced inspiration

 c) Mid inspiration

 d) Crying is continuous



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Forced Expiration
Cyanotic form (cyanotic spells)
This is more common and is provoked in response to frustration and
anger precipitated by upsetting or scolding infant/child.
Cyanotic spells are due to central sympathetic overactivity.
Clinical features include generalized cyanosis, apnea, forced
expiration(crying stops) , opisthotonus, shrill cry and bradycardia.
Seizures may occur due to cerebral hypoxia, but antiepileptics are
not required.
The only treatment is support and reassurance to parents
1381. Treatment of choice for symptomatic
      neonatal hypoglycemia is
 a) Dextrose normal saline

 b) 5% dextrose

 c) 10% dextrose

 d) 25% dextrose



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. 10% dextrose
Symptomatic or asymptomatic with blood glucose < 20 mg/dl
Bolus 10% dextrose 2 ml/kg is given IV. Followed by continuous
infusion of 6 mg/kg/minute. If normoglycemia is not achieved within
24 hours, glucocorticoids (prednisone or hydrocortisone) should be
administered. For intractable hypoglycemia, glucagon, epinephrine
or diazoxide can be given.
In hypoglycemic seizures, dose of 10% dextrose is 4 ml/kg
1382. ALL of the following are causes of
      neonatal bradycardia except
 a) Hypoxia

 b) Hypothermia

 c) Head injury

 d) BCG Vaccine



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. BCG Vaccine
Neonatal bradycardia is defined as a decrease in heart by 30 bpm
from baseline. Regarding neonatal resuscitation, bradycardia is
concerning when the heart rate is less than 100 bpm.
1383. Which of the following is not a cause of
      neonatal anaemia?
 a) Subgaleal Hemorrhage

 b) Abruptio placentae

 c) Diamond Blackfan syndeome

 d) Wilson's Disease



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Wilson's Disease
Internal hemorrhage such as intracranial hemorrhage, subgaleal
hemorrhage, cephalohematoma, adrenal hemorrhage, subcapsular
hematoma of liver or ruptured viscus
Obstetrical causes: placental abruption, placenta previa, trauma to
placenta or umbilical cord during delivery and rupture of anomalous
placental vessels
Twin-twin transfusion
RBC destruction
RBC production
  1384. 3 month old child with indrawing chest
        with respitratory rate 52/min classified
        as
    a) SIRS

    b) Respiratory distress

    c) Tachypnoea

    d) ARDS



   Correct Answer - B
   Answer- B. Respiratory distress
   Tachypnea (fast breathing) : Fast breathing is defined as :-
1. Less than 2 months of age -› 60 breaths per minute
2. Child aged 2 months upto 12 months - 50 breaths per minute
3. Child aged 12 months upto 5 years -> 40breathsperminute
  1385. 45 day old infant presents with
        seizures. Examination reveals he is
        icteric, having bulging fontanelles and
        opisthotonic posture. Treatment is all
        except
    a) Phototherapy

    b) Exchange Transfusion

    c) Phenobarbitone

    d) Chlorpromazine



   Correct Answer - D
   Answer- D. Chlorpromazine
   Chlorpromazine is not used in hyperbilirubinemia.
   Treatment of hyperbilirubinemia includes
1. Pharmacological tharapy: Barbiturates (phenobarbitone),
   metallloporphyrins (Tin/Sn and Zinc/Zn)
2. Phototherapy
3. Exchange tronsfusion
1386. Chronic lung disease in a infancy is
      defined as
 a) Need for supplemental oxygen at 36 weeks after conception

 b) Tachypnoea > 50 breaths/ min within 1 week of birth

 c) Presence of bilateral infiltrates on chest Xray for 2 weeks

 d) Reticulogranular pattern on chest Xray for 6 weeks



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Need for supplemental oxygen at 36 weeks after
conception
Chronic lung disease of infancy was formerly called
bronchopulmonary dysplasia.
Bronchopulmonary dysplasia is usually defined as a need for
supplemental oxygen at 36 weeks after conception.
Bronchopulmonary dysplasia is usually defined as a need for
supplemental oxygen at 36 weeks after conception. BPD is usually
defined as a need for supplemental oxygen at 36 wk after
conception.
BPD is a result of lung injury in infants requiring mechanical
ventilation and supplemental oxygen.
1387. Most common antigen involved in
      erythroblastosis fetalis is
 a) C antigen in Rh group

 b) D antigen in Rh group

 c) E antigen in Rh group

 d) Duffy antigen



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. D antigen in Rh group
RBC antigens are capable of eliciting an antibody response,
significant disease is associated primarily D antigen of Rh group and
with ABO incompatibility
1388. Eryhtematous blotchy rash is seen on
      the abdomen, trunk and face of a 3 day
      old child along with yellowish papules.
      However the child feels well. What is
      the management ?
 a) Steroid and antibiotic lotion

 b) No treatment

 c) Steroid cream

 d) Urgent intravenous antibiotics



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. No treatment
Erythema toxicum neonatorum is a benign self-limited eruption
occurring primarily in healthy newborns in the early neonatal period.
It is characterized by Erythematous papules on trunk & face. They
appear on 2nd & 3rd day and disappear spontaneously.
   1389. Further investigation is essential in a
         newborn with which condition?
     a) Erythema toxicum

     b) Vaginal bleed

     c) Subconjunctival hemorrhage

     d) Lens opacity



    Correct Answer - D
    Answer- D. Lens opacity
    The problems are
 1. Milia
 2. Erythema toxicum
 3. Stork bites
 4. Peeling of skin
 5. Subconjuctival hemorrhages
 6. Breast engorgment
 7. Epstein pearl
 8. Pre-deciduous (natal teeth)
 9. Vaginalbleeding
10. Vaginalmucoiddischarge
11. Hymenaltags
12. Physiologicalphymosis
13. Mongolian spots
1390. A newborn presents with
      subconjunctival hemorrhage. The
      treatment is
a) No treatment

b) Antibiotic eye drops

c) Aspitation

d) Antibiotic and steroid drops



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. No treatment
Subconjunctival hemorrhage in newborn is a normal phenomenom
which disappears spontaneously.
1391. What is the shape of caecum in the
      newborn ?
 a) Ovoid

 b) Trapezoid

 c) Globular

 d) Conical



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Conical
The shape of the caecum in an infant is conical with the appendix
borne at the base of the cone.
1392. Most common complication of Meckel's
      Diverticulum lit children
 a) Abdominal pain

 b) Peptic ulcers

 c) Intestinal obstruction

 d) Painless Rectal bleeding



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Painless Rectal bleeding
Most comnmon presentation of Meckel's Diverticulum in children is
painless rectal Bleeding.
[Ref Alemayehu H, Hall M, Desai AA, St Peter SD, Snyder CL.
Demographic disparities of children presenting with symptomatic
Meckel's diverticulum in children's hospitals. Pediatric Surgery
International. 2014 Jun 30. 6:649-653]
1393. Which of the following is a X linked
      metabolic disorder?
 a) Fabry's disease

 b) Sandoff s disease

 c) Pompe disease

 d) Gaucher disease



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Fabry's disease
All lysosomal disorders are `autosomal recessive' except for
Hunter's syndrome and Fabry's disease, which are X-linked
recessive. Thus Hunter's syndrome and Fabry's disease affect only
male.
1394. Testes are not palpable in
 a) SRY deletion

 b) DAX 1 deletion

 c) WNT- 4 gene mutation

 d) RSPO-1 gene mutation



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. SRY deletion
SRY gene is involved in development of male gonds (testes) from
primitive (bipotential gonads).
DAX-1, WNT-4 and RSPO1 genes are involved in development of
female gonads (ovary).
1395. Child with 10 episodes of diarrhea in
      last 24 hours with sunken dry eyes,
      very slow skin pinch, and absent tears.
      Management is
 a) ORS solution

 b) breast feeding

 c) Start 10% dextrose

 d) Start Ringer's lactate



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Start Ringer's lactate
This is a case of severe dehydration.
Severe Dehydration
Start IV fluids immediately
Best IV fluid solution is Ringer lactate
Normal saline can be used
Dextrose is not effective
100 ml/kg is to be given as shown below:
AGE                  FIRST               THEN
<12 months           30 nil/kg in I hours70 ml/kg 5 hours
12 months to 5 yrs.30 minutes            21/2 hrs
1396. 1 year old child with multiple episodes
      of diarrhea presents with sunken dry
      eyes, depressed fontanelles, very slow
      skin pinch. The amount of fluid to be
      given in the first 6 hours is
 a) 600 ml

 b) 900 ml

 c) 1200 ml

 d) 1500 ml



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. 900 ml
The approximate weight of a 1 year old child is 9kg (ie thrice the
birth weight)
The description of dehydration given above is consistent with severe
dehydration. T
1397. What is the first line treatment of a 4
      year old child presenting with
      intussusception ?
a) Conservative management with wait and watch policy

b) Immediate attempt to reduction using barium edema

c) Surgical correction

d) Exploratory laparotomy with resection of the affected segment



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Immediate attempt to reduction using barium edema
Correction of intussusception by barium enema is the initial
management of choice. If it fails, surgical correction is done.
  1398. Hutchison's Triad is seen in
    a) Congenital Syphilis

    b) Tertiary syphilis

    c) Secondary Syphilis

    d) Primary syphilis



   Correct Answer - A
   Answer- A. Congenital Syphilis
   Hutchinson's triad is a common pattern of presentation of Congenital
   syphilis.
   It consists of three phenomena :
1. Interstitial keratitis,
2. Hutchinson incisor,
3. Eighth nerve deafness
1399. Hydrocephalus is best detected
      antenately by :
 a) X-ray abdomen

 b) Amniocentesis

 c) Clinical examination

 d) Ultrasonography



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is d i.e. Ultrasonography
Hydrocephalus is a condition in which there is an abnormal increase
in cerebrospinal fluid within the ventricular and subarachnoid spaces
of brain.
"The prenatal diagnosis of hydrocephalus is usually made by
demonstration of a dilated ventricular system in an ultrasound
examination."
Earliest and most accurate sonographic sign of hydrocephalus –
Enlarged lateral ventricles.°
The lateral ventricle is measured at the level of atrium.
Normal transverse diameter of atrium is 7 mm ± 1 mm. (It remains
constant during the second and third trimester)
When diameter of atrium is >10 mm it is called as Ventriculomegaly /
Hydrocephalus.
Other signs of hydrocephalus on USG :
Dangling choroid plexuses.
Thinning out of cerebral cortex.
Extra Edge :
Friends, the terms ventriculomegaly and hydrocephalus are often
used interchangeably but have slightly different meanings.
* Ventriculomegaly : The condition in which lateral ventricles of the
brain are filled with excessive fluid and enlarge.
* Hydrocephalus : There is ventriculomegaly along with an increase
in the head circumference.
Normal fetal head circumference at term ranges between 32 and 38
cms.
With hydrocephalus, the circumference exceeds 50 cms.
Ventriculomegaly can also be caused by° :
* Spina bifida°
* Chromosomal abnormalities°
* Congenital infections like cytomegalovirus. toxoplasmosis, syphilis
and influenza.°
Dandy walker syndrome includes Hydrocephalus + Posterior fossa
cyst°+ Defect in cerebellar vermis.
1400. Triad of normal pressure
      hydrocephalus includes all except -
a) Dementia

b) Gait disturbance

c) Urinary incontinence

d) Browache



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Browache
Triad of normal pressure hydrocephalus/Adam's triad/Hakim's
triad
Dementia
Gait disturbance
Urinary incontinece (wet, wacky and wobbly)
1401. Medulloblatoma arises exclusively from
      the cells of
 a) Immature embryonal cells

 b) Ependymal cells

 c) Neurons

 d) Spindle shaped cells



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Immature embryonal cells
Medulloblastoma is the most common PNET (primitive
neuroectodermal tumor) located in posterior cranial fossa.
[Ref Hinz, Chris; Hesser, Deneen. Focusing On Brain Tumors:
Medulloblastoma. American Brain Tumor Association]
1402. Hypoxic Ischemic encephalopathy true
      is ?
 a) Lower limbs affected more than upper limbs

 b) Prox. Muscles > distal muscles

 c) Seizure

 d) Trunk involved



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Seizure
Clinical features of hvpoxic ischemic encephalopath'
o Encephalopathy progress over time ?
1) Birth to 12 hours —> Decreased level of conciousness, poor
tone, decreased spontaneous movement, periodic breathing or
apnea, seizures.
2) 12-24 hours -4 More seizuers, Apneic spells, jitteriness,
weakness.
3) After 24 hours —> Hypotonia, conciousness, poor feeding,
brainstem signs (oculomotor) and pupillary disturbances.
1403. Which of the following is not true about
      encephalocoele?
 a) It is a neural tube defect

 b) Common in the frontal region

 c) Can be associated with hydrocephalus

 d) It is protrusion of neural tissue through a defect



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. It is a neural tube defect
Perinatal asphyxia, more appropriately known as hypoxic-ischemic
encephalopathy (HIE), is characterized by clinical and laboratory
evidence of acute or subacute brain injury due to asphyxia. The
primary causes of this condition are systemic hypoxemia and/or
reduced cerebral blood flow (CBF)
1404. True about cephalhematoma is -
 a) It is hemorrhage between the skull and periosteum

 b) It is hemorrhage within the subcutaneous tissue around the
    skull

 c) It is type of subdural hemorrhage

 d) It is extraperiosteal bleeding in the skull



Correct Answer - A
Amswer- A. It is hemorrhage between the skull and periosteum
Cephalhematoma is subperiosteal bleeding, i.e. between skull bone
and periosteum.
1405. A 8 year old child presents with a mass
      in the lumbar region with abdominal
      pain with excruciating bone pain.
      Possible diagnosis is -
 a) Neuroblastoma

 b) Wilm's Tumour

 c) Lymphoma

 d) Angiomyolipoma



Correct Answer - A
Amswer- A. Neuroblastoma
This is a case of neuroblastoma that has metastatized
Metastasis is present in 60-70% at the time of diagnosis.
Commonest site of metastasis is skeletal system and neuroblastoma
is the most common childhood malignancy metastasizes to bone.
1406. A 6 year old child presents with an
      abdominal mass, fever, bone pain and
      IVC thrombosis , the diagnosis could be
      -
 a) Wilm's tumour

 b) Neuroblastoma

 c) Langerhans cell Histiocytosis

 d) Gastric lymphoma



Correct Answer - B
Amswer- B. Neuroblastoma
Renal vein invasion is more characteristic of neuroblastoma (it is
rare in wilms tumor).
1407. Kwashiorkor- Triad includes all except -
 a) Psychomotor changes

 b) Hypoglycemia

 c) Edema

 d) Growth retardation



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Hypoglycemia
Classical triad of kwashiorkor is markedly retarded growth,
psychomotor (mental) changes and edema.
1408. What is the maintainance fluid
      requirement in a 6 kg child ?
 a) 240 ml/day

 b) 600 ml/day

 c) 300 ml/day

 d) 1200 ml/day



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. 600 ml/day
Fluid Requirements in: Infants and Children
           HOLLIDAY - SEGAR METHOD
             100ml/kg
First 10 kgl                                   Na+3
             (4ml/kg/hr)
             1000ml + 50ml/kg for each Kg>10kg
10-20kg                                        K+2
             (40ml/hr+2ml/kg/hr(wt-10kg)
             1500ml + 20ml/kg for each Kg>20kg
>20kg                                          Cl-2
             (60ml/hr + 1ml/kg/hr(wt-20 kg)
1409. Most common site for opening of
      TAPVC is -
a) Supracardiac

b) Cardiac

c) Infracardiac

d) Multiple



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Supracardiac
Type I (Supra Cardiac) TAPVC Most common 45%
Type II (Cardiac level) TAPVC - 25%
Type III (Infra Cardiac) TAPVC - 25%
Type IV (Multiple level) TAPVC 4 5%
1410. Which one of the following statements is false about
      Xanthogranulomatous pyelonephritis in children?

 a) Often affects those younger than 8 years of age

 b) It affects the kidney focally more frequently than diffusely

 c) Clinical presentation in children is same as in adults

 d) Boys are affected more frequently



Correct Answer - D
It is most frequently affected in females compared to males. It is an
unusual form of chronic pyelonephritis characterized by
granulomatous abscess formation, severe kidney destruction, and a
clinical picture that may resemble renal cell carcinoma and other
inflammatory renal parenchymal diseases.

Xanthogranulomatous pyelonephritis is a form of chronic
pyelonephritis characterised by destruction of renal parenchyma and
the presence of granulomas, abscesses and collection of lipid laden
foamy macrophages (foam cells).

Xanthogranulomatous pvelonephritis in children

* Age of presentation ranges from infancy to 16 years.

* Focal firm being more common in children Appear healthy.

* Those who affected diffusely, present with non-specific
symptoms of chronic infection.

i) Weight loss             ii) Fever              iii) Lethargy    iv)
Failure to thrive
* Proteus is the most common causative organism.

Ref: By James Pattison, David Goldsmith, Barrie Hartley, Fernando
C. Fervenza and Joseph P. Grande (2004), Chapter 6, “Renal
Infections and Structural Abnormalities”, In the book, “A Colour
Handbook of Renal Medicine”, UK, Page 100.
1411. Autosomal recessive Polycystic
      kidneys - all are true except -
 a) Seen in adults

 b) Defective gene is PKHD1

 c) Both kidneys show innumerable cysts

 d) USG shows salt and pepper appearance



Correct Answer - A
Amswer- A. Seen in adults
Childhood polycystic kidney disease has autosomal recessive
inheritance, therefore it is also known as autosomal recessive
polycystic kidney disease.
Defective gene is the PKHD1 (Polycystic Kidney and Hepatic
Disease1) which codes for a protein fibrocystin
Both kidneys are markedly enlarged and show innumerable cysts
radiating from medulla the cortex.
MRI of kidney shows radially arranged fusiform dilated collecting
ducts.
Prenatal USG shows a salt and pepper appearance of kidney.
1412. Investigation of choice for
      CONFIRMING Henoch Schonlein
      purpura is -
 a) Serum IgA levels

 b) CRP levels

 c) Renal Biopsy

 d) DTPA



Correct Answer - C
Amswer= C. Renal Biopsy
Biopsy of the kidney may be performed both to establish the
diagnosis or to assess the severity of already suspected kidney
disease.
1413. Abdominal pain in Henoch Schonlein
      purpura is due to -
 a) Mucosal erosions and swelling of the GI mucosa

 b) Gastrointestinal hemorrhage

 c) Volvulus

 d) Associated pancreatic inflammation



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Mucosal erosions and swelling of the GI mucosa
The second most frequent symptom of Henoch-SchOnlein purpura
is abdominal pain, which occurs in up to 65 percent of cases. The
most common complaint is colicky abdominal pain, which may be
severe and associated with vomiting.
Endoscopic evaluation often shows mucosal erosions and swelling.
1414. Which of the following is not a feature of Juvenile Idiopathic Arthritis?
 a) Rheumatoid nodules

 b) Spikes of high fever

 c) Uveitis

 d) Raynaud's phenomenon



Correct Answer - D
Raynaud's Phenomenon is not mentioned in association with Juvenile Idiopathic Arthritis
(JIA).

Ref: Current Diagnosis and Treatment in Rheumatology, 2nd Edition, Pages 196-197;
Nelson’s Textbook of Pediatrics, 18th Edition, Page 1003; Primer on The Rheumatic
Diseases By John H. Klippel, Page 145
1415. Which of the following is correct about
      shock in child?
 a) Tachycardia is a very sensitive indicator of depletion of
    intravascular volume

 b) Mottling of extremities is seen in early shock

 c) Confusion, stupor and coma are early signs

 d) Respiratory rate is more sensitive than heart rate as an
    indicator of early shock



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Tachycardia is a very sensitive indicator of
depletion of intravascular volume
Hypovolemic shock in children may have following stages : -
i) Early compensated
Immediately after hypovolemia, body tries to maintain the BP to
maintain adequate perfusion to vital organs through a compensatory
mechanisms.
An increase in heart rate (Tachycardia) is the earliest and most
sensitive indicator for intravascular volume reduction
ii) Late uncompensated
If shock state continues or the compensatory mechanisms are not
enough to maintain the metabolic needs of the tissue, the shock,
goes into uncompensated phase.
1416. Inotropic support for severely
      dehydrated child with dopamine is done
      at what rate -
 a) 0.1-0-5 microgram/kg/min

 b) 1-5 microgram/kg/min

 c) 1-5 mg/kg/min

 d) 10-15 mg/kg/min



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. 1-5 microgram/kg/min
In high doses, it acts on alpha-adrenergic receptors to increase
systemic vascular resistance and raise blood pressure.
1-5 mcg/kg/min IV, increased to 5-20 mcg/kg/min; not to exceed 50
mcg/kg/min.
  1417. Test done to diagnose syphilis in
        newborn if mother is syphilitic -
   a) Syphilis Capita M test

   b) Detection of IgG

   c) ZN staining

   d) Fluoroescent antigen test



   Correct Answer - A
   Answer- A. Syphilis Capita M test
   The tests to detect IgM are -
1. FTA-ABS (19S IgM FTA-ABS).
2. Syphilis Capita M test.
1418. Eyelid papules and hoarse cry in a child
      is suggestive of -
 a) Congenital syphilis

 b) Croup

 c) Lipoid proteinosis

 d) Acrodermatitis enterohepatica



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Lipoid proteinosis
Lipoid proteinosis also known as hyalinosis cutis et mucosa or
Urbach-Weithe disease is a rare autosomal recessive disorder.
characterized clinically by a myriad signs and symptoms that include
hoarseness of the voice, beaded eyelid papules (Moniliform
blepharosis), yellowish-white mucocutaneous infiltrates, and atrophic
pock-like scars.
1419. In acute diarrhea following is used to
      decrease duration and severity -
 a) Zn

 b) Mg

 c) Fe

 d) Ca



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Zn
Recent studies suggest that administration of zinc along with new
low osmolarity oral rehydration solutions / salts (ORS), can reduce
the duration and severity of diarrheal episodes for up to three
months.
[Ref Sachdev HP, Mittal NK, Yadav HS. Oral zinc supplementation
in persistent diarrhea in infants. Ann Trop Paediatr. 1990;10:63-9.]
1420. Japanese encephalitis vaccine in
      routine schedule is given in how many
      doses -
 a) Two doses 1 month apart with a booster after 1-2 years if
    needed

 b) Single dose vaccine

 c) Three doses 1 month apart followed by a booster if needed

 d) Three doses with the second dose 1 month and 3' dose 6
    months after the first dose



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Two doses 1 month apart with a booster after 1-2
years if needed
A Vero cell-derived, inactivated and alum-adjuvanted JE vaccine
based on the SA 14-14-2 strain is used. The primary two doses are
administered 4 weeks apart. A booster dose is recommended 1-2
years after the primary immunization
1421. Consanguinous marriages increase risk
      of diseases -
 a) Autosomal dominant disease

 b) Autosomal recessive disease

 c) X linked dominant diseases

 d) Environmental diseases



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Autosomal recessive disease
Increases risk of - autosomal recessive disease
No change in risk of - autosomal dominant, X linked recessive (if
neither parent affected)
Not Proven - complex late onset diseases like diabetes,
schizophrenia, cardiovascular diseases
1422. Floor of nasal cavity in children is made
      of -
 a) Palatine bone and vomer

 b) Sphenoid and ethmoid

 c) Nasal bone and maxilla

 d) Palatine bone and maxilla



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Palatine bone and maxilla
"The floor of the nasal cavities, which also form the roof of the
mouth, is made up by the bones of the hard palate: the horizontal
plate of the palatine bone posteriorly and the palatine process of the
maxilla anteriorly."
[Ref Moore, Keith L; Dailey, Arthur F. (1999). Clinically Oriented
Anatomy. Lippincott Williams er Wilkins.]
1423. Most common site for bone marrow
      aspiration in neonates is -
 a) Anterior superior iliac crest

 b) Posterior superior iliac crest

 c) Sternum

 d) Anteromedial tibia



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Anteromedial tibia
Preferred site for bone marrow aspiration in children - Posterior
superior iliac crest.
In children < 18 month of age → Anteromedial tibia is preferred.
1424. Reduced osmolarity ORS does not
      contain which of the following ion -
 a) Sodium

 b) Potassium

 c) Lactate

 d) Citrate



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Lactate
Table 1: Composition of standard and reduced osmolarity ORS
solutions
ORS → StandardReduced Osmolarity
Contents↓ mEq/L      mEq/L
Glucose 111          75
Sodium 90            75
Choride 80           65
Potassium20          20
Citrate   10         10
Osmoarity 311        245
30 mmol/l of bicarbonate instead of 10 mmol/l of citrate
1425. Which is found in DiGeorge's syndrome
      -
 a) Tetany

 b) Eczema

 c) Total absence of T cells

 d) Absent B and T cells



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Tetany
Digeorge syndrome
Digeorge syndrome is an example of a T cell deficiency that results
from failure of development of the third and fourth pharyngeal
pouches.
* Clinical features?
* Enhanced susceptibility to viral, fungal (mucocutaneous
candidiasis) and bacterial infections.
* Facial abnormalities : Hypertelorism, abnormal ears, short philtrum
and micrognathia.
Hypocalcemic tetany due to failure of parathyroid development.
Congenital heart diseases eg fallot's tetralogy.
* Absence of a normal thymus.
* Serum immunoglobulin concentration are frequently normal, but
antibody responses, particularly of IgG and IgA isotypes, are usually
impaired.
* T cell levels are reduced (not total absence).
* B cell levels are normal.
1426. Therepeutic phlebotomy is not done in
      which of the following conditions ?
 a) CML

 b) Polycythemia vera

 c) Hemochromatosis

 d) Porphyria cutanea tarda



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. CML
Indications for therepeutic phlebotomy-
Polycythemia vera
Hemochromatosis
Secondary polycythemia
Porphyria cutanea tarda
[Ref Current applications of therapeutic phlebotomy Tarek Bou Assi
and Elizabeth Baz. Blood Transfus. 2014 Jan; 12(Suppl 1): s75-s83]
1427. Which of the following is present in a
      XY child but not in a XX child ?
 a) Epoophoron

 b) Paroophoron

 c) Cowper's glands

 d) Gartner's duct



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Cowper's glands
Bulbourethral gland (Cowper's gland) are found in males (XY) and
are homologous to Bartholin's gland in females (XX).
[Ref : "Differentiation of the urogenital sinus in males". Embryology]
1428. Treatment of choice for Kawasaki
      Disease is:
 a) IV Immunoglobulins

 b) Steroids

 c) Dapsone

 d) Methotrexate



Correct Answer - A
Answer is A (IV Immunoglobulins):
The treatment of choice in Kawasaki disease is intravenous
immunglobulins
1429. Puff of smoke appearance on cerebral
      angiography is seen in:
 a) ACA aneurysm

 b) Cavernous sinus thrombosis

 c) Moyamoya disease

 d) Vein of Galen malformation



Correct Answer - C
Ans. c. Moyamoya disease
Moyamoya disease is an idiopathic, non inflammatory, non
atherosclerotic progressive vasculo-occlusive disease involving the
circle of Willis, typically the supraclinoid internal carotid arteries.
Small abnormal net-like vessels proliferate giving the
characteristic "puff of smoke" appearance on direct
angiography. CTA and MRA is not always able to demonstrate this
appearance on account of lower flow and spatial resolution.
1430. Osteoclasts have all of the following
      except -
 a) Bone resorption

 b) Receptor for parathormone

 c) Ruffledborder

 d) RANK ligand



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Receptor for parathormone
Osteoclasts are found in sites in which bone is being remodeled
These cells are the principal mediator of bone resorption
The characteristic feature is the area of infolded plasma membrane
known as ruffled border which is surrounded by an organelle free
clear zone through which osteoclast attaches to bone & which is the
site of bone resorption.
RANK binds to RANK Ligand which stimulates bone resorption.
Parathormone are present on osteoblasts (not on osteoclasts).
1431. PTH acts directly on which cells ?
 a) Osteoclasts

 b) Osteocytes

 c) Osteoblasts

 d) Macrophages



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Osteoblasts
Parathormone activates osteoblasts which then secrete mediators of
osteoclastogenesis that stimulate osteoclasts for bone resorption.
1432. Most vascular zone of the bone is -
 a) Metaphysis

 b) Diaphysis

 c) Epiphysis

 d) Medullary Cavity



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Metaphysis
Metaphysis is the most vascular zone of the bone especially in
children as it has long hairpin loop arranged arterioles and venules
running through it.
1433. Snapping knee syndrome is due to
      involvement of -
 a) Pes Anserinus

 b) Quadrieps Tendon

 c) Gastrocnemius origin

 d) lateral collateral ligament



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Pes Anserinus
Snapping knee syndrome is characterized by painful clicks/ catching
sensations experienced during every movement of flexion and
extension. It is experienced usually at the posteromedial corner of
the knee and ususally is due to involvement of semitendinosus and
gracilis tendons.
1434. Tennis elbow is characterized by ?
 a) Tenderness over the medial epicondyle

 b) Tendinits of common extensor origin

 c) Tendinitis of common flexor origin

 d) Painful flexion and extension



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Tendinits of common extensor origin
Tennis elbow is extraarticular affection characterized by pain and
acute tenderness at the origin of the extensor muscles of the
forearm from the lateral epicondyle.
It is believed to be caused by strain of the forearm extensor
muscles, particularly the extensor carpi radialisbrevis, at the point of
their origin from lateral epicondyle.
1435. Flexor Digitorum Profundus tendon
      avulsion injury leads to -
 a) Jersey Finger

 b) Mallet Finger

 c) Gamekeepers Thumb

 d) Boutonierre Deformity



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Jersey Finger
Jersey Finger - Flexor digitorum profundus Injury
Mallet Finger -Avulsion injury of extensor digitorum tendon
Gamekeepers Thumb - chronic injury to ulnar collateral ligament of
thumb
Bennets Fracture- Intra articular fracture at the base of 1st
metacarpal
1436. K nail can be used for all of the
      following fractures excePt -
 a) Isthmic femur shaft fractures

 b) Intertrochanteric fractures

 c) Low subtrochanteric fractures

 d) Distal femur shaft fractures



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Intertrochanteric fractures
K nail is a clover leaf shaped nail that relies on the principle of three
point fixation
K nail can never be used for intertrochanteric fractures as it cannot
provide stability in this fracture.
1437. Extensor Carpi Radialis Longus is -
 a) Extensor and ulnar deviator ofthe wrist

 b) Extensor and radial Deviator of the wrist

 c) Injured in Posterior interosseus nerve injury

 d) Weak extensor of the wrist



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Extensor and radial Deviator of the wrist
Extensor carpi Radialis Longus is a primary extensor and radial
deviator of the wrist.
Loss of function causes wrist drop.
1438. Thomas test is used for testing?
 a) Hip flexion

 b) Knee flexion

 c) Hip abduction

 d) Hip rotation



Correct Answer - A
A
Hip flexion REF: Lange Instant Access: Orthopedics and Sports
Medicine, by Anil Patel, page 106
Thomas Test: With the patient lying supine, maximally flex both hips.
Allow the femur on the ipsilateral side to fall into as much extension
as possible, while holding the other hip up. The angle between the
femur and examining table is the residual flexion and represents the
flexion contracture.
1439. A child presented to an orthopaedic
      clinic with a limp. The surgeon
      suspected him to have a fixed fledon
      deformity of the hip. Which test should
      the surgeon perform to confirm his
      finding?
 a) Thomas test

 b) Trendelenburgs test

 c) Nelatons test

 d) Telescoping test



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Thomas test
Thomas test is done for flexion deformity of hip.
1440. Trigger Finger Involves Which joint ?
 a) Proximal Interphalngeal joint

 b) Distal Interphalngeal foint

 c) Metacarpophalangeal joint

 d) Carpometacarpal joint



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Metacarpophalangeal joint
The mouth of the fibrous digital sheath is at the level of metacarpo-
phalangeal joint.
1441. Effect of hypoparathyroidisrn on bones
      include -
 a) Brown tumours

 b) Subperiosteal Resorption of Bone

 c) Multiple Cysts in Bone

 d) NoneoftheAbove



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. NoneoftheAbove
Features of Hypoparathyroidism
Premature closure of epiphyses
Generalized increase in bone density (Osteosclerosis)
Calvarial thickening
Sacroiliac sclerosis
Bandlike density in metaphysic
Thickened lamina dura + widened diploe
Deformed hip (thickening & Sclerosis of femoral head & acetabulum)
Intracranial calcification
Calcification of spinal & Other ligaments
Subcutaneous calcification
Ectopic bone formation
Ossification of muscle insertions
1442. Bone transport can be used in the
      management of -
 a) Gap non union

 b) Deformity Correction

 c) Communited shaft femur fracture

 d) Avscular Necrosis of Femoral Head



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Gap non union
Bone transport technique is primarily used in the management of
gap non unions.
An osteotomy is made in the normal bone and a segamnt of bone is
transported to the non union site
1443. Aeroplane splint is used in ?
 a) Radial nerve injury

 b) Ulnar nerve injury

 c) Brachial plexus injury

 d) Scoliosis



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Brachial plexus injury
Name                      Use
Cramer-wire splint        Emergency immobilisation
Thomas splint             Fracture femur-anywhere
Bohler-Braun splint Fracture femur-anywhere
Aluminium splint          Immobilization of fingers
Dennis Brown splint CIEV
Cock-up splint            Radial nerve palsy
Knuckle-bender splint Ulnar nerve palsy
Toe-raising splint        Foot drop
Volkmann's splint         Volkmann's ischaemic contracture (VIC)
Four-post collar          Neck immbilisation
Aeroplane splint          Brachial plexus injury
SOMI brace                Cervical spine injury
ASHE (Anterior spinal Dorso-lumbar spinal injury
hyperextension)           brace
Taylor's brace            Dorso-lumbar immobilisation
Milwaukee brace           Scoliosis
Boston bracet             Scoliosis
Lumbar corset             Backache
1444. AII of the following are true regarding
      application of POP Cast except -
 a) Putting the Plaster roll in warm water hastens setting time

 b) It is anhydrous Calcium phosphate

 c) It can applied in presence of extreme swelling

 d) Gangrene is known complication of a tight plaster cast



Correct Answer - B
Answer B. It is anhydrous Calcium phosphate
POP is chemically hemihydrous calcium sulphate.
Warm water hastens while cold water slows the setting time.
Plaster cast should be avoided when there is extreme swelling.
Common complications of plaster casts include compartment
syndrome, gangrene and plaster sores.
1445. In uncemented arthroplasty of the hip ,
      the stem remains attached to the bone
      by -
a) Bone Ingrowth/ ongrowth over the surface of the stem

b) Mechanical bonding between the stem and bone

c) Press fitting of the stem in the tight canal

d) Adhesion between the stem and bone due to ashesive
   properties ofthe stem



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Bone Ingrowth/ ongrowth over the surface of the
stem
Bone in growth-
Over porous surface.
Optimal pore size should be 100 to 400 microns.
Fiber mesh or beads are present over the stem surface.
Stem created by sintering or diffusion bonding processes.
1446. During perfoming a total hip
      replacement, the surgeon found
      destruction of the articular cartilage and
      rnultiple wedge shaped subchondral
      depressions. What is this called ?
 a) Osteolysis

 b) Osteomyelitis

 c) Osteonecrosis

 d) Osteogenesis



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Osteonecrosis
Presence of dense wedge shaped opacities in the anterolateral
quadrant of the femoral head this is called sectoral involvement.
Presence of multiple cystic and sclerotic areas
Acetabular involvement leads to development of severe arthritis
1447. Sudden dorsiflexion of foot may lead to
      which of the following injuries -
 a) Anterior talofibular ligament injury

 b) Tendo Achilles avulsion injury

 c) Rupture of deltoid ligament

 d) Tarsal tunnel syndrome



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Tendo Achilles avulsion injury
A rupture of the Achilles tendon occurs when the tendon is stretched
outside beyond its capacity.
The most common site of rupture is the "watershed" less vascular
area of tendon, which is 4 cm proximal to its insertion on calcaneum.
1448. Salter Harris classification is used for -
a) Supracondylar humerus fractures in children

b) Estimation of growth of the physes

c) Physeal injuries

d) Severity of degloving injuries to the limb



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Physeal injuries
1449. Milwaukee Brace is used in -
 a) Congenital Kyphosis

 b) Scheurmanns Disease

 c) Adolescentldiopathic Scoliosis

 d) Spondylolisthesis



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Congenital Kyphosis
The Milwaukee brace is a plastic body jacket used in the treatment
of adolescents with idiopathic scoliosis and Scheuermann's disease.
The Milwaukee brace, also refferred to as a Cervico-Thoraco-
Lumbo-Sacral-Orthosis brace, is similar to braces for the lower back,
but also includes a neck ring held in place by vertical bars attached
to the body of the brace.
  1450. Vertebra Plana is seen in all except -
   a) Histioctosis X

   b) Leukemia

   c) Excessive use of systemic steroids

   d) Scheurmanns Disease



   Correct Answer - D
   Answer- D. Scheurmanns Disease
   Causes of Vertebra Plana
1. Histocytosis - X (Eosinophilic granuloma)
2. Leukemia
3. TB
4. Metastasis, Multiple myeloma, Ewing's sarcoma, lymphoma
5. Osteochondritis of vertebral body (Calve's disease)
6. Hemangioma
7. Trauma
8. Steroids
1451. What is luxatio erecta ?
 a) Anterior Dislocation of the shoulder joint

 b) Inferior Dislocation of the shoulder joint

 c) Anterior Dislocation of the HIP joint

 d) Posterior Dislocation of Hip joint



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Inferior Dislocation of the shoulder joint
The head of the humerus is below the glenoid cavity and the
humeral shaft is pointing overhead.
It is due to hyperabduction injury.
It is rare and also called luxatio erecta because the humeral head is
subluxated (dislocated inferiorly) and humerus shaft points upwards
(erected).
1452. Which of the following casts/splints is
      used for fracture shaft humerus ?
 a) Hanging casts

 b) Knuckle bender splint

 c) Aeroplane Splint

 d) Above elbow cast



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Hanging casts
Hanging cast- Fracture of the humerus
Turn-buckle cast- Scoliosis
1453. Lift off test is done to assess the
      function of:
 a) Supraspinatus

 b) Infraspinatus

 c) Teres Minor

 d) Subscapularis



Correct Answer - D
D i.e. Subscapularis
- Failure to perform maximum internal rotation (as tested in belly
press and lift off test) or inability to maintain position of maximal
internal rotation (internal rotation lag sign) indicate tear of
subscapularis tendon.
Lift off test is done to assess the strength of subscapularis muscle
and detect an isolated rupture of subscapularis tendon in a rotator
cuff tear.
1454. All are true about menisci of knee joint
      except
 a) Lateral meniscus covers more articular surface of tibia-

 b) Lateral meniscus is more mobile

 c) Lateral meniscus is more prone to injury

 d) Lateral meniscus is semicircular



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Lateral meniscus is more prone to injury
  1455. Three point bony relationship of the
        elbow is disturbed in -
    a) Supracondylar Fracture of the humerus

    b) Fracture lateral condyle of the humerus

    c) Monteggia Fracture dislocation

    d) Fracture of Proximal Radius



   Correct Answer - B
   Answer- B. Fracture lateral condyle of the humerus
   Three prominent bony points around elbow are medial epicondyle,
   lateral epicondyle and tip of the olecranon.
   In elbow injuries, following is seen in three bony relationship :
1. Maintained
2. Disturbed
1456. Hamilton Ruler test sign is positive in
      which of the above mentioned
      conditions ?
 a) Anterior dislocation of shoulder

 b) Acrornioclavivular joint dislocation

 c) Posterior dislocation of shoulder

 d) luxatio erecta



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Anterior dislocation of shoulder
Hamilton ruler test : Because of flattening of shoulder, it is possible
to place a ruler on the lateral side of arm and it touches acromian &
lateral condyle of humerus simultaneously (in normal it would not
due to shoulder contour).
1457. Cubitus Valgus Deformity is commonly
      seen in which of the following
      conditions -
a) Malunited Lateral Condylar fracture of Humerus

b) Malunited Supracondylar Fracture of Humerus

c) Posterior dislocation ofelbow

d) Fracture medial condyle of humerus



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Malunited Lateral Condylar fracture of Humerus
Fractures commonly showing cubitus valgus deformity due to
malunion :
Fracture lateral condyle humerus
Monteggia Fracture Dislocation
1458. True regarding Monteggia fracture is:
      March 2007, March 2013 (a, b, d, f)
 a) Upper ulnar fracture & dislocated radial head

 b) Upper radial fracture & dislocated ulna

 c) Lower radial fracture & dislocated ulna

 d) Lower ulnar fracture & dislocated radius



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A: Upper ulnar fracture & dislocated radial head
Monteggia fracture-dislocations are classified by the Bado
system
Bado type I injuries are characterized by a proximal ulnar fracture
with anterior dislocation of the radial head. This is due to a forceful
pronation injury of the forearm and is the most common type.
Bado type II injuries are "reversed" Monteggia fracture-dislocation
injuries.
Here, there is posterior angulation of the ulnar fracture site and
posterior dislocation of the radial head. Bado type III and IV are rare
injuries.
1459. Dinner fork deformity is seen in?
 a) Colle's fracture

 b) March fracture

 c) Lateral condyle fracture

 d) Supracondylar fracture



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Colle's fracture
Complications of colle's fracture
Complications in colle's fracture are high (50-60%). Following
complications may occur
1) Stiffness of fingers and joints
Stiffness of finger, wrist and shoulder is the most common avoidable
complication of colle's fracture.
This occurs due to lack of exercise. Therefore, patient should be
encouraged for active exercise of finger and shoulder.
2) Malunion
It is the second most common complication
It results in dinner fork deformity
3) Sudek's osteodystrophy (reflex sympathetic dystrophy)
4) Carpal tunnel syndrome:
Median nerve may get compressed in carpal tunnel
5) Carpal instability
6) Rupture of the extensor pollicis longus tendon
7) Frozen shoulder syndrome
This is a troublesome complication which develops due to
unnecessory voluntary shoulder immobilization by the patient on the
affected side for fear of fracture displacement.
8)TFCC injury
9) Non-union is very rare
1460. AVN following transcervical neck femur
      fractures occurs due to damage to
      which of the following blood vessels ?
 a) Lateral retinacular branch of lateral circumflex femoral artery

 b) Lateral retinacular branch of medial circumflex femoral artery

 c) Medial retinacular branch of lateral circumflex femoral artery

 d) Obdurator artery



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Lateral retinacular branch of lateral circumflex
femoral artery
Lateral circumflex femoral artery It supplies through anterior
retinacular artery.
1461. Brodie-Trendelenburg test is positive
      in:
 a) Deep vein thrombosis

 b) Sapheno-femoral incompetence

 c) Thromboangiitis obliterans

 d) Below-knee perforators incompetence



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B: Sapheno-femoral Incompetence
A test to assess the competence of the saphenofemoral junction.
The Brodie-Trendelenburg test is used to detect venous
incompetence and to differentiate between perforator and GSV
incompetence.
The Brodie-Trendelenburg test is highly sensitive for the
identification of superficial and perforator reflux.
 SFJ (saphenofemoral junction) incompetence is diagnosed if the
distal veins fill rapidly upon release of the tourniquet.
Some textbooks refer to the Trendelenburg test and the tourniquet
test interchangeably.
1462. Lockingoftheknee involves -
 a) External rotation of femur with the foot offthe ground

 b) Internal rotation of the tibia with the foot on the ground

 c) Contraction of popliteus

 d) Internal rotation of femur with foot on the ground



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Internal rotation of femur with foot on the ground
Physiological locking occurs in extension when the femur is
internally (medially) rotated on a fixed tibia. Locking is a mechanism
that allows the knee to remain in the position of full extension as in
standing without much muscular efforts and is caused by quadriceps
femoris.
1463. Foot drop occurs due to the
      involvement of:
      September 2006, March 2013 (b, f g, h)
 a) Sciatic nerve

 b) Direct injury to the dorsiflexors

 c) Common peroneal nerve palsy

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D: All of the above
Foot drop may follow direct injury to the dorsiflexors.
A few cases of rupture of the tibialis anterior tendon leading to foot
drop and suspicion of peroneal nerve palsy have occurred. This
subcutaneous tendon rupture usually occurs after a minor trauma
with the foot in plantar flexion.
Compartment syndromes also may lead to foot drop.
March gangrene, a form of anterior compartment syndrome, is
thought to be due to edema and small hemorrhages in the muscles
of the anterior compartment occurring after strenuous activity in
individuals not accustomed to it. Deep posterior compartment
syndrome also may result in foot drop as a late sequela due to
resultant contracture formation.
Neurologic causes of foot drop include mononeuropathies of the
deep peroneal, common peroneal, or sciatic nerves. Lumbosacral
plexopathy, lumbar radiculopathy, motor neuron disease, or
parasagittal cortical or subcortical cerebral lesions also can manifest
as foot drop. These lesions can be differentiated through clinical and
electrodiagnostic examinations.
A common behavioral cause of foot drop is habitual crossing of the
legs. These cases typically resolve with discontinuation of the habit.
Foot drop also may be seen as a combination of neurologic,
muscular, and anatomic dysfunction. Charcot foot is one example.
1464. Fracture neck of femur in 80 year old
      male sustained 1 weekback The
      treatment of choice is -
 a) Hemiarthroplasty

 b) ExcisionarthroPlastY

 c) Closed reduction and fixation with three cancellous screws

 d) Longitudinal skin traction for 6 weeks



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Hemiarthroplasty
Closed reduction & screw fixation
If 2 attempts of closed reduction fail, hemiarthroplasty is done
1465. Which of the following fractures of the
      neck of femur are associated with
      maximal compromise in blood supply ?
 a) Intertrochantericfractures

 b) Basicervical fracture

 c) Trans cervical fracture

 d) Sub Capital fractures



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Sub Capital fractures
The non-union and AVN will be most common in subcapital fracture
and least in basicervical fracture.
1466. AVN is seen in which type of # of femur:
 a) Intertrochantric #

 b) Subcapital #

 c) Trans cervical #

 d) B AND C



Correct Answer - D
B. i.e. Subcapital > C. i.e. Transcervical
Fracture of the neck of femur
Fracture of the Scaphoid ( Proximal pole> Waist)
Fracture neck of talus
Posterior dislocation of the hip
1467. Tinels sign is seen in -
 a) Avascular necrosisof scaPhoid

 b) Kienbock s Disease

 c) lst carpometacarpal joint arthritis

 d) Carpal tunnel syndrome



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Carpal tunnel syndrome
Median nerve percussion test (Tinel's sign) : - The median nerve is
gently tapped at the wrist. The test is positive if there is tingling
sensation
1468. Which of the following is used as a
      substitute for wrist extensors in radial
      nerve PalsY?
 a) Pronator Teres

 b) Palmaris Longus

 c) Flexor Digitorum SuPerficialis

 d) Flexor Digitorum Profundus



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Pronator Teres
Pronator teres is a common muscle used as a substitute for wrist
extensors in case of wrist drop occurring as a result of radial nerve
palsy. Pronator teres is a pronator of the forearm supplied by
Median nerve.
1469. Most common cause of ca4ral tunnel
      syndrome is ?
 a) Pregnancy

 b) Idiopathic

 c) Alcoholism

 d) Occupational-Excessive use of vibratory instruments



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Idiopathic
Most common type of carpal tunnel syndrome is idiopathic → no
known cause.
1470. A 45 year old carpenter with a blunt
      trauma to his arm sustained a fracture
      followingwhich he developedwrist drop,
      loss of extension at fingers and loss of
      sensations on the lateral aspect of the
      wrist joint. Which of the following is
      true ?
 a) Patient has an injury to the median nerve

 b) He should have also lost extention of the forearm

 c) Patient has injured the radial nerve in the spird groove

 d) There is combined involvement of the radial nerve and median
    nerve



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Patient has injured the radial nerve in the spird
groove
Radial nerve injury may be high or low.
1) High radial nerve palsy
Injury is before the spiral groove
All muscles supplied by radial nerve are paralysed
2) If lesion is high
Wrist drop, thumb drop and finger drop.
Inability to extend elbow, wrist, thumb & fingers (MP joint)
Patient can extend interphalangeal joints due to action of lumbricals
and interossei.
Sensory loss over posterior surface of arm & forearm and lower
lateral half of forearm.
1471. Wrist drop is due to injury to ?
 a) Radial nerve

 b) Ulnar nerve

 c) Median nerve

 d) Posterior interosseous nerve



Correct Answer - A
Ans. (A) Radial nerve
Clinical features of radial nerve palsy
Clinical features depend upon the site of lesion.
1) If lesion is high
Wrist drop, thumb drop and finger drop.
Inability to extend elbow, wrist, thumb & fingers (MP joint)
Patient can extend interphalangeal joints due to action of lumbricals
and interossei.
Sensory loss over posterior surface of arm & forearm and lower
lateral half of forearm.
2) If lesion is low
a) Type I
Wrist drop, thumb drop and finger drop.
Elbow extension is preserved.
Sensory loss over the dorsum of first web space.
b) Type II
Thumb drop and finger drop
Elbow and wrist extension is preserved
Sensory loss over the dorsum of first web space.
1472. In which of the following deformities is
      the distal interphalangeal joint extended
      ?
 a) Boutonniere deformity

 b) Swan neck deformity

 c) Z deforrnity

 d) Claw Hand



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Boutonniere deformity
Boutonniere deformity : Flexion contracture of PIP joint and
extension of DIP joint.
   1473. Club foot clinically present as what
         deformity ?
    a) Calcaneovalgus

    b) Equinovarus

    c) Equino Cavovarus

    d) Calcaneovarus



   Correct Answer - C
   Answer- C. Equino Cavovarus
   CTEV is the commonest and most important congenital deformity of
   the foot.
   The deformity consists of following elements :
1. Equinus, i.e. Plantar flexion at ankle joint (tibiotalar joint)
2. Inversion of foot at subtalar joint (talocalcaneal joint)
3. Forefoot adduction, at mid-tarsal joints, especially at talo-navicular
   joint.
4. Sometimes forefoot cavus, i.e. excessive arching of the foot at mid-
   tarsal joints
1474. 4 year old child presented to the clinic
      with a history of fall on outstretched
      hand. Radiographs revealed a broken
      anterior cortex with an intact posterior
      cortex Of the radius with an
      exaggerated bowing of the radius. The
      fracture sustained is known as -
 a) Torus Fracture

 b) Greenstick fracture

 c) Galleazi Fracture

 d) Monteggia Frtacture Dislocation



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Greenstick fracture
Greenstick Fracture: Incomplete fracture of the bone with plastic
deformation on the concave side of the bone. The fracture needs to
be completed to obtain reduction.
1475. Greenstick/ Nightstick fractures are
      seen in -
a) Children

b) Elderly

c) Youngadults

d) Common in all age groups



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Children
1476. Waddling gait due to:
      March 2009
 a) Bilateral congenital dysplasia of hip

 b) Coxa valga

 c) CTEV

 d) Bilateral coxa valgum



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A: Bilateral congenital dysplasia of hip
A waddling gait is the style of walking that is seen in a patient
with proximal myopathy. It is characterised by:
A broad-based gait with a duck-like waddle to the swing phase
The pelvis drops to the side of the leg being raised
Forward curvature of the lumbar spine
Marked body swing
This gait may be seen in patients with bilateral congenital hip
dislocation and pregnancy.
1477. Blount's disease is associated with all of the following, EXCEPT:
 a) Genu varum

 b) Genu Recurvatum

 c) Internal Tibial Torsion

 d) External Tibial Torsion



Correct Answer - D
Blount’s disease is characterized by varus and internal tibial torsion and genu recurvatum,
with varus of the proximal tibia being the primary deformity. It is not associated with external
tibial torsion.
Ref: Operative techniques in pediatric orthopedics, by John M.Flynn, Sam W.Wiesel, Page
205, 206.
1478. Who devised correction of CTEV by
      serial castinga -
 a) Ignasio Ponseti

 b) Gerhardt Kuntscher

 c) Gavril Ilizarov

 d) Hugh Owen Thomas



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Ignasio Ponseti
Ignasio Ponseti propounded the technique of serial weekly casts.
1479. Osteosclerosis is a feature of which of
      the followinga -
 a) Rickets

 b) Hyperparathyroidism

 c) Pagets Disease

 d) Osteogenesis Imperfecta



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Pagets Disease
Paget's disease is characterized by increased bone turnover and
enlargement and thickening of the bone, but the internal architecture
is abnormal and the bone is usually brittle.
Primary defect is in osteoclasts with increased osteoclastic activity.
This results secondarily increase in osteoblastic activity (normal
osteoclasts and osteoblasts act in a co-ordinated manner).
1480. All of the following are true regarding
      Pagets Disease except -
a) Pelvis is the most common site

b) Cranial nerve involvement may be seen

c) High output cardiac failure is one of the complications

d) It may progress to a secondary chondrosarcoma



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. It may progress to a secondary chondrosarcoma
Pagets disease may progress to a secondary osteosarcoma not
chondrosarcoma
1481. Which of the following is/are true about perthes disease?
           1. Avascular necrosis of femoral head
           2. Onset before 10 years of age
           3. Osteotomy is used for treatment
           4. Limb shortening




 a) 1,2 true & 3,4 false

 b) 2,3 True & 1,4 false

 c) 1,2,3 true & 4 false

 d) All are true



Correct Answer - D
It is also known as the pars plana and Pseudo Coxalgia. It is an osteochondritis of the
femoral head. The femoral head becomes partly or wholly avascular and deformed.
Etiology is not definetly known. It is supposed to be due to reccurent episoedes of
ischemia of the femoral head in the suceptible age group, probably perecipitaed by
episodes of synovitis.
Pathology: the disease progresses in three ill defined stages:
Stage of synovitis
Stage of trabecular necrosis
Stage of healing
Clinical features:
Commonly seen in the age group of 5 to 10 years. Child present with pain in the hip which
often radiates to the knee or may also present with limp or hip stiffness. On examination,
the finding are minimal. sometimes the only finding being limitation of abduction and
internal rotation and shortening.

X- ray shows collapse and sclerosis of the epiphysis of the femoral head. hip joint space is
increased. Bone scan may show a decreased uptake by the head of the femur.
Treatment: The primary aim is to prevent the head from ill shaping while the bone is in the
softening phase. The head is required to be kept inside the acetabulum while the
revascularization takes place (i.e. containment). This may be achieved by corrective
methods (plaster, splint etc.) or by operation (containment osteotomy).
Ref: Maheshwari 3/e, Page 269-70.
1482. Microorganism which causes pyogenic
      osteomyelitis is ?
 a) Streptococcus

 b) Staph aureus

 c) Corynebacterium

 d) Neisseria gonorrhoeae



Correct Answer - B
Staphylococcus aureus causes 80–90% of cases of acute
pyogenic osteomyelitis. S aureus has a receptor for collagen, which
contributes to its pathogenicity. Other organisms that cause
osteomyelitis include:
Escherichia coli and Pseudomonas in intravenous drug users and
patients with urinary tract infections.
Haemophilus influenzae and Group B Streptococcus in neonates.
Salmonella in patients with sickle cell disease.
Ref: Wyatt C., Kemp W.L., Moos P.J., Burns D.K., Brown T.G.
(2008). Chapter 19. Pathology of the Bones and Joints. In C. Wyatt,
W.L. Kemp, P.J. Moos, D.K. Burns, T.G. Brown (Eds), Pathology:
The Big Picture.
1483. Commonest site of occurrence of
      chondrosarcoma is -
 a) Pelvis

 b) Ribs

 c) Femur

 d) Proximal tibia



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Pelvis
A chondrosarcoma is a malignant tumor derived from cartilage cells
and it tends to maintain its cartilaginous character throughout its
evolution
Most commonly involved bones are pelvis (most common), femur
(2nd most common), humerus, ribs and shoulder girdles.
It may be at metaphysis or diaphysis.
1484. Onion peel appearanace on Xray is
      seen in which of the following
      conditions ?
a) Ewings Sarcoma

b) Osteosarcoma

c) Giant cell tumour

d) Eosinophilic granuloma



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Ewings Sarcoma
Onion Peel Appearance Ewings Sarcoma
Codmans Triangle      Osteosarcoma
Sun Burst Appearance Osteosarcoma
Soap Bubble appearanceGCT
1485.
Which part of the spine is most commonly
affected in Rheumatoid arthritis:
 a) Cervical

 b) Lumbar

 c) Thoracic

 d) Sacral



Correct Answer - A
Answer is A (Cervical):
Rheumatoid arthritis commonly involves the joints of hands, wrist,
elbow, knees, ankle, and feet in a symmetrical manner.
Axial skeleton involvement is usually limited to Upper Cervical
Spine.
1486. Hammer toe deformity is seen in -
 a) Rheumatoid arthritis

 b) Fracture distal phalanx ofgreat toe

 c) Bunion

 d) Osteochondritis



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Rheumatoid arthritis
Foot Hallux valgus, Hammer toe, etc.
1487. Nerve damaged due to lunate
      dislocation (in carpal tunnel):
 a) Median & ulnar

 b) Median

 c) Ulnar

 d) Radial



Correct Answer - B
B. i.e. Median nerve
Common causes of median nerve palsy in carpal tunnel are carpal
tunnel syndrome (most common) and Innate dislocation.
1488. Malodorous vaginal discharge is due
      to
 a) Bacterial vaginosis

 b) Chlamydia trachomatis

 c) Trichomonas vaginalis

 d) Neisseria gonorrhea



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Bacterial vaginosis
Bacterial vaginosis is an alteration of the normal vaginal flora with
consequent overgrowth of pathogenic bacteria.
There is fall in the absolute number of hydrogen peroxide -
producing lactobacilli, leading to a rise in pH and increase in the
absolute number of G. vaginalis, anaerobic gram - negative rods,
Mobiluncus spp. and Mycoplasma hominis.
1489. Quickening in multiparae is felt at what
      weeks of gestation?
 a) 14 weeks

 b) 16 weeks

 c) 18 weeks

 d) 20 weeks



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. 16 weeks
Quickening is feeling of life. It denotes perception of active fetal
movements by the women. It is usually felt about the 18th week,
about 2 weeks earlier in multiparae. Its appearance is an useful
guide to calculate the expected date of delivery with reasonable
accuracy.
1490. True about placental site trophoblastic
      disease is
 a) Highly Malignant behavior

 b) Hysterectomy followed by chemoradiation is the treatment of
    choice

 c) Secretes human placental lactogen

 d) Contains syncytiotrophoblasts mainly



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Secretes human placental lactogen
Placental Site Trophoblastic Tumour
Arises from the placental bed trophoblasts and invades the
myometrium.
Follows a full - term normal delivery.
Tumor contains mainly cytotrophoblasts with few or no
syncytiotrophoblasts.
Most of these tumors run a benign course, malignancy is rare.
[Ref Shaw's Gynae le/e p. 313; Dutta's Obs 8thie p. 231]
1491. Crowning is
 a) Biparietal diameter at the inlet of pelvis

 b) Biparietal diameter at the ischial spine

 c) Biparietal diameter at the vulval outlet

 d) Biparietal diameter just outside the vulval outlet Answer-



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Biparietal diameter at the vulval outlet
Crowning : After internal rotation of the head, further descent occurs
until the subocciput lies underneath the pubic arch. At this stage, the
maximum diameter of the head (biparietal diameter) stretches the
vulval outlet without any recession of the head even after the
contraction is over - called "crowning of the head".
1492. Prolonged second stage of labour may
      occur due to
 a) Uterine inertia

 b) Epidural analgesia

 c) Cephalopelvic disproportion

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. All of the above
Prolongation of second stage of labour can occur due to any of
the following reasons :
1) Fault in the power
Uterine inertia
Inability to bear down
Epidural analgesia
Constriction ring
2) Fault in the passage
Cephalopelvic disproportion, android pelvis, contracted pelvis
Undue resistance of the pelvic floor or perineum due to spasm or old
scarring
Soft tissue pelvic tumor.
3) Fault in the passenger
Malposition (occipito - posterior)
Malpresentation
Big baby
Congenital malformation of the baby
1493. Progesterone of choice in emergency contraception is?
 a) Norethisterone

 b) Medroxyprogesterone

 c) Oxytocin

 d) Levonorgestrel



Correct Answer - D
Unprotected intercourse without regard to the time of the month carries an 8% incidence of
pregnancy, an incidence that can be reduced to 2% by the use of emergency
contraceptives within 72 hours of unprotected intercourse.
0.75 mg levonorgestrel are now approved for postcoital contraception and are available
over the counter for women aged >17 years. Levonorgestrel is more effective and is
associated with fewer side effects than the combination estrogen-progestin regimens.
Basically the methods used interfere with the physiological events before implantation, for
e.g. inhibition or delaying of ovulation or interference with postovulatory events necessary
for implantation & longevity of the blastocyst.

Ref: Hall J.E. (2012). Chapter 347. The Female Reproductive System, Infertility, and
Contraception. In D.L. Longo, A.S. Fauci, D.L. Kasper, S.L. Hauser, J.L. Jameson, J.
Loscalzo (Eds), Harrison's Principles of Internal Medicine, 18e.
1494. Lovset manoeuvre is used in delivery of
      :
 a) Head

 b) Breech

 c) Foot

 d) Arms



Correct Answer - D
Arms
Lovset's maneuver
Principle : Because of the curved birth canal, when the anterior
shoulder remains above the symphysis pubis, the posterior shoulder
will be below the sacral promontory. If the fetal trunk is rotated
keeping the back anterior and maintaining a downward traction, the
posterior shoulder will appear below the symphysis pubis.
1495. Common misdiagnosis of partial mole
      is
 a) Threatened abortion

 b) Choriocarcinoma

 c) Complete mole

 d) Ectopic pregnancy



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Threatened abortion
The clinical picture of partial mole is confused with threatened
abortion or missed abortion due to pain and bleeding alongwith a
fetus (usually dead) in utero.
1496. When fetus is at station +2 & fetal skull
      reaches pelvic floor, which of the
      following is true
 a) Forceps can be applied

 b) Best time to give episiotomy

 c) Called as crowning

 d) May lead to deep transverse arrest



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Forceps can be applied
When the fetal skull has reached the level of pelvic floor and station
of head is at + 2 or more, outlet forceps can be applied.
However, crowning is defined as stretching of the vulva' outlet by the
maximum diameter of the fetal head (biparietal diameter) without
any recession. Thus the station is + 5.
Best time to give episiotomy is at the time of crowning of head.
[Ref Dutta's Obstetrics 81h/e p. 651]
1497. Most common breech position is
 a) Complete breech

 b) Frank breech

 c) Footling breech

 d) Knee presentation



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Frank breech
Frank breech (Breech with extended legs) is the most common
breech presentation.
Breech with extended legs (Frank breech) : Thighs are flexed at hip
and legs are extended at knee. It is commonly seen in primigravidae
(70%).
It is the most common type of breech.
1498. Which is not a risk factor for gestational
      hypertension
 a) Obesity

 b) Smoking

 c) Primigravida

 d) Factor V Leiden mutation



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Smoking
Primigravida : Young or elderly (first time exposure to villi)
Family history (hypertension, pre - eclampsia)
Placental ischemia
Obesity
Thrombophilia (antiphospholipid syndrome), protein C and S
deficiency, factor V Leiden mutation)
Molar pregnancy (early onset pre - eclampsia)
1499. Method not used for shoulder dystocia
 a) McRobert's maneuver

 b) Hegar's maneuver

 c) Zanavelli maneuver

 d) Wood's maneuver



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Hegar's maneuver
McRobert's, Zanavelli and Wood's maneuvers' are maneuvers in the
management of shoulder dystocia.
1500. Occipitoanterior position
 a) Anterior fontanalle is posterior

 b) Sagittal suture is along the Transverse plane of the maternal
    pelvis

 c) Coronal suture is along the antero - posterior plane of the
    maternal pelvis

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Anterior fontanalle is posterior
In direct occipito anterior position, the sagittal suture of the fetus will
be along the antero - posterior plane of the maternal pelvis and the
coronal suture along the transverse diameter.
1501. In Medical termination of pregnancy,
      according to FDA, Misoprostol is given
      after how many hours of Mifepristone?
 a) 24 hours

 b) 48 hours

 c) 72 hours

 d) 96 hours



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., 48 hours
FDA approved protocol - (Original protocol)
600 mg of mifepristone (i.e., 3 tablets) given orally on day 1 followed
2 days (48 hours) later by oral misoprostol 400 tig (2 tablets) on day
3.
The treatment should be started no more than 48 days from the start
of the last menstrual period.
But according to the recent protocol
200 mg of mifepristone (it is as effective as 600 mg of mifepristone)
is given orally on Day 1 followed 2 days (48 hours) later by vaginal
misoprostol 800 pg.
This regime provides highest efficacy within 63 days of amenorrhea.
1502. The best method for inducing mid
      trimester abortion is :
 a) Injection of Hypertonic Saline

 b) Ethacrydine

 c) Prostaglandins

 d) D and C



Correct Answer - C
Prostaglandins
Mid trimester termination of pregnancy
A) Medical methods
i)    Prostaglandins : misoprostol (PGE 1) with or without Mife
pristone, gemeprost (PGE1), dinoprostone (PGE2), carboprost
(PGE2)
ii)    Oxytocin
1503. Twin pregnancy of the same age and
      sex rules out ?
 a) Superfetation

 b) Maternal twins

 c) Superfecundation

 d) None of the above



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Superfetation
Superfetation
It is the simultaneous occurrence of more than one stage of
developing offspring in the same animal.
In mammals, it manifests as the formation of an embryo from a
different estrous cycle while another embryo or fetus is already
present in the uterus.
   1504. Propulsive stage in labour in multipara
    a) 10 minutes

    b) 20 minutes

    c) 40 minutes

    d) 1 hour



   Correct Answer - B
   Answer- B. 20 minutes
   Second stage of labour has two phases :
1. Propulsive phase: from full dilatation of cervix until head touches
   pelvic floor.
2. Expulsive phase : Since the time there is irresistible maternal desire
   to bear down until the body is delivered.
   Mean duration of second stage is 50 minutes for nullipara and 20
   minutes in multipara.
1505. During pregnancy increased size of
      pituitary is caused by increased size of
      cells which secrete ?
 a) Growth hormone

 b) Prolactin

 c) ACTH

 d) TSH



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Prolactin
Prolactin levels rise gradually throughout pregnancy, preparing the
breast for lactation.
This lactotroph hyperplasia has important implications for the patient
with a prolactinoma who desires pregnancy.
1506. Therapeutic use of folic acid is
 a) Previous pregnancy with child having neural tube defect

 b) Megaloblastic anaemia

 c) Hemoglobinopathies

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Megaloblastic anaemia
Folic acid is given in all the given conditions. But answer hear is
option b.
This questions is tricky :-
Examiner is asking about therapeutic uses of folic acid (not
preventive)
In megaloblastic anemia, folic is given for treatment —> therapeutic
uses
In pregnancy it is given for prevention of neural tube defect —>
prophylactic use (preventive use)
1507. What would be the type of presentation when the engaging diameter is
      mentovertical?

 a) Face

 b) Brow

 c) Vertex

 d) Breech



Correct Answer - B
In brow presentation, the engaging diameter is mentovertical (14cm). Brow is the
rarest variety of cephalic presentation where the presenting part is the brow and the attitude
of the of the head is short of that degree of extension necessary to produce face
presentation.
In face presentation, the presenting part is face, attitude of the fetus shows complete
flexion of the limbs with extension of the spine. The commonest position is left mento
anterior. The engaging diameter of the head is submento bregmatic 9.5cm in fully
extended head or submento vertical 11.5cm in partially extended head.

Ref: Textbook of Obstetrics By D.C Dutta, 6th edn, page 392-3
1508. Cardiac output in pregnancy increases
      from which week of gestation
 a) 5 weeks

 b) 15 weeks

 c) 25 weeks

 d) 35 weeks



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. 5 weeks
Cardiac output starts to increase from the 5th week of gestation,
reaches its peak 40 - 50% at 30 - 34 weeks.
1509. Stroke volume increases in pregnancy
      by
 a) 20%

 b) 25%

 c) 40%

 d) 45%



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. 25%
            Hemodynamic changes during pregnancy
                                     Pregnancy near
                   Non - pregnant                       Change
                                     term
Cardiac output
                   4.5               6.26               +40%
(lit/m1)
Stroke volume (ml) 65                75                 +27%
Heart rate (per
                   70                85                 + 17%
minute)
                   Unaffected or mid pregnancy drop of diastolic
Blood pressure
                   pressure by 5 - 10 mmHg
                   8 - 10 cm
Venous pressure                      20 cm              +100%
                   (femoral)
Colloid oncotic
                   20                18                 - 14%
pressure (mmHg)
Systemic vascular
                                                        - 21%
resistance
Pulmonary vascular
                                                        - 34%
rests
1510. Oxygen consumption increases in
      pregnancy by
 a) 10%

 b) 20%

 c) 30%

 d) 40%



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. 20%
Oxygen consumption increases approximately 20% during
pregnancy, and it is approximately 10% higher in multifetal
gestation.
During labour, oxygen consumption increases 40 - 60%.
  1511. Which of the following about abdominal
        pregnancy is true?
    a) Primary abdominal pregnancy is more common

    b) If placenta is densely adhered, it should be separated alongwith
       the organ it overlies

    c) Around 50% of the fetus reach full term and survive

    d) If placenta is left behind, infection can occur



   Correct Answer - D
   Answer- D. If placenta is left behind, infection can occur
   Abdominal Pregnancy
   A) Primary Abdominal Pregnancy
   Criteria to diagnose primary abdominal pregnancy by Studiford :
1. Both the tubes and ovaries are normal without evidence of recent
   injury
2. Absence of uteroplacental fistula
3. Presence of a pregnancy related exclusively to the peritoneal
   surface and young enough to eliminate the possibility of secondary
   implantation following primary nidation in the tube
   B) Secondary
   Almost always secondary, the primary sites being tube, ovary or
   even the uterus - the conceptus escapes out through the rent in the
   uterine scar.
1512. 45 yrs female with G5P4A0L4 with LMP
      25.8.15, gestational age will be how
      many weeks on date 11.5.15?
 a) 32 weeks

 b) 35 weeks

 c) 36 weeks

 d) 40 weeks



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. 36 weeks
if the patient's LMP is 25.8.15 then EDD would be 3.6.16.
On 11.5.15, patient would be 23 days left would for EDD, that is 3
weeks and 2 days. Subtracting this from 40 weeks, the patients
gestational age would be 36 weeks and 5 days.
1513.
Incidence of scar rupture in a subsequent
preg​nancy in case of Lower Segment
Cesarean Section (LSCS) is:
 a) 2%

 b) 4%

 c) 5%

 d) 8%



Correct Answer - A
2%
The risk of lower segment scar - rupture is low (0.2-1.5%) and even if
it does occur, maternal death is much less and the perinatal
mortality is about 1 in 8.
1514. Which of the following is not a probable
      sign of pregnancy
 a) Jacquemier's sign

 b) Dalrymple sign

 c) Hegar's sign

 d) Palmer's sign



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Dalrymple sign
Probable signs of pregnancy :
Jacquemier's sign/Chadwick's sign
Osiander's sign
Goodell's sign
Piskacek's sign
Hegar's sign
Palmer's sign
Braxtor-hicks contraction
External ballotment
Abdominal enlargement
Outlining the fetus
1515. Which of the following ovarian tumor is
      most prone to undergo torsion during
      pregnancy :
 a) Serous cystadenoma

 b) Mucinous cystadenoma

 c) Dermoid cyst

 d) Theca lutein cyst



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is c i.e. Dermoid cyst
"A benign cystic teratoma is the most common neoplasm to undergo
torsion, and it to the M/C benign tumor diagnosed during
pregnancy."
A benign cystic teratoma is synonymous to dermoid cyst.
Remember :
Most common ovarian tumour in pregnancy is serous cystadenoma
but mostly remains undiagnosed.
Incidence of dermoid cyst is increased two fold during pregnancy
and it is the most common neoplasm diagnosed during pregnancy.
Hingorani sign seen : - In ovarian tumor during pregnancy.
Trendelenburg's position can elicit the groove between two separate
swelling. Used to distinguish between ovarian tumour and fibroid.
1516. What is the preferred treatment of
      complete prolapse in a female with
      completed family?
 a) Sling surgery

 b) Vaginal hysterectomy

 c) Le Forte's repair

 d) Pessary



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Vaginal hysterectomy
Vaginal hysterectomy is commonly performed for major degree
uterine prolapse in a female with completed family.
1517. In MRKH syndrome, which among the
      following is absent?
 a) Vagina

 b) Breast development

 c) Pubic hair development

 d) Testes



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Testes
MRKH syndrome is also known as MURCS syndrome (Mullerian
agenesis, Renal aplasia and cervicothoracic somite dysplasia).
MRKH (Mayer Rokitansky Kuster Hauser) syndrome has a
karyotype of 46, XX. So the gonads present are ovaries in contrast
to Androgen Insensitivity Syndrome where testes are present.
The MRKH syndrome is characterized by congenital aplasia of the
uterus and the upper part (2/3) of the vagina in women showing
normal development of secondary sexual characteristics and a
normal 46, XX karyotype.
1518. If the symphysiofundal height is 40 cm
      and the station of the head is at -1,
      weight of the fetus is approximately
 a) 3 kg

 b) 3.3 kg

 c) 4 kg

 d) 4.3 kg



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. 4.3 kg
Johnson's Formula for estimation of fetal weight :
Height of the uterus above the symphysis pubis in centimeters
minus 12, if the vertex is at or above the level of ischial spines or
minus 11, if the vertex is below the level of ischial spines - multiplied
by 155 gives the weight in grams.
Solution : (40 - 12) x 155 = 4340 gms
1519. Which of the following is true regarding
      precocious puberty :
 a) Sexual maturity is attained early

 b) Mental function is increased

 c) No reproductive function

 d) Body proportions are enlarged



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is a i.e. Sexual maturity is attained early
Precocious puberty is the appearance of appropriate secondary
sexual characters before the age of 8 years and occurrence of
menstruation before 10 years of chronological age.
Also know : Delayed puberty : is considered delayed when the
secondary sexual characters do not appear by the age of 14, and
menarche is not established by 16 years of age.
1520. During which gestational age is peak serum HCG levels attained ?
 a) 7-9 weeks

 b) 11-13 weeks

 c) 20 weeks

 d) 25 weeks



Correct Answer - A
HCG rises progressively from conception. Levels double on the average, every 30.9 hours
until values reach 6500 mIU/ml (6,500 IU/L) at approximately the eighth week after the last
menstrual period (LMP).
After that the rate of rise becomes individualized, peaking between the 60th and 70th
day (9 to 10 weeks) LMP.
HCG decreases slightly between the 12th and 16th week post LMP, and then remains
constant until birth.
1521. Cephalic index is
 a) BPD/OFD

 b) BPD/HC

 c) OFD/BPD

 d) HC/FL



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. BPD/OFD
Cephalic index = BPD / OFD (Biparietal diameter divided by the
occipito - frontal diameter)
1522. The role of human placental lactogen is
      :
 a) Stimulate milk production

 b) Fetal breast development

 c) Growth of fetus

 d) Endocrine regulation



Correct Answer - C
Growth of fetus
Functions :
a) Provide fetal nutrition by antagonizing the action of insulin in
maternal circulation, breakdown of fats and proteins and transport of
fatty acids and amino acids from maternal to feta circulation.
b) Potent angiogenic, helps develop fetal vasculature.
c) Promotes growth of breast for lactation.
1523. Hot flushes are experienced as a result
      of
 a) Increased noradrenaline

 b) Decreased estrogen

 c) Increased noradrenaline and decreased estrogen

 d) Increased noradrenaline and estrogen



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Increased noradrenaline and decreased estrogen
Hot flushes are caused by noradrenaline, which disturbs the
thermoregulatory system. Oestrogen deficiency reduces
hypothalamic endorphins, which release more norepinephrine and
serotonin. This leads to inappropriate heat loss mechanism.
Other causes that can be associated with the symptom of hot
flushes include: thyroid disease, epilepsy, pheochromocytoma,
carcinoid syndromes, autoimmune disorders, mast cell disorders,
insulinoma, pancreatic tumours and even leukemias.
  1524. Kallmans syndrome is associated with
        all of the following except
    a) Amenorrhea

    b) Excess stimulation of the HPO axis

    c) Genetic mutation

    d) Anosmia



   Correct Answer - B
   Answer- B. Excess stimulation of the HPO axis
   When congenital GnRH deficiency is associated with anosmia or
   hyposmia (an absent or grossly impaired sense of smell), the
   disorder is known as Kallmann's syndrome.
   Two genetic mutations associated with Kallman's Syndrome :
1. KAL gene - X - linked inheritance (Xp22.3) encoding anosmin - 1.
2. Gene encoding FGFR1 (Fibroblast growth factor - 1 receptor) -
   autosomal dominant form.
   Anosmin - 1 is a neural adhesion molecule that promotes migration
   of GnRH neurons and olfactory neurons, from the olfactory placode
   into the hypothalamus during embryonic development.
1525. Patient with NTD, dose of folic acid in
      next pregnancy
 a) 0.5 mg

 b) 1 mg

 c) 2 mg

 d) 4 mg



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. 4 mg
Folic acid supplementation 4 mg daily 1 month before conception to
about 12 weeks of pregnancy.
1526. Absolute contraindication for IUD (Intra
      Uterine Contraceptive Device) are all
      except ?
 a) Pregnancy

 b) Undiagnosed vaginal bleeding

 c) Pelvic inflammatory disease

 d) Uterine malformation



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd i.e., Uterine malformation
Contraindications
ABSOLUTE:
a)     Suspected pregnancy
b)     Pelvic inflammatory disease
c)     Vaginal bleeding of undiagnosed etiology
d)     Cancer of the cervix, uterus or adnexa and other pelvic
tumours
e)     Previous ectopic pregnancy
RELATIVE :
a)     Anaemia
b)     Menorrhagia
c)     History of PID(Pelvic Inflammatory Disease) since last
pregnancy
d)     Purulent cervical discharge
e)     Distortions of the uterine cavity due to congenital
malformations, fibroid
f)     Unmotivated person
   1527. G2P1L1 female with 1 : 4 anti D titres at
         28 weeks gestation, management is
    a) MCA Doppler

    b) Caesarean section

    c) Induction of labour

    d) Amniocentesis



   Correct Answer - A
   Answer- A. MCA Doppler
   If Indirect Coomb's test is positive in an antenatal patient with Rh
   negative blood group, and antibody titres >1 : 16 or Ab level > 10
   IU/ml
1. Serial MCA Doppler, every 1 - 2 weeks from 20 weeks
2. Serial ultrasonography every 2 - 3 weeks from 20 weeks
1528. All are of value in modified Bishop
      score except
a) Dilatation

b) Effacement

c) Cervical length

d) Consistency



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Effacement
1529. Antimullerian hormone is secreted by ?
 a) Granulosa cells

 b) Lyedig cells

 c) Sertoli cells

 d) None



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Sertoli cells
Antimullerian hormone or Mullerian inhibiting substance is secreted
by sertoli cells.
1530. Number of stem villi at term in human
      placenta is
 a) 60

 b) 120

 c) 240

 d) 480



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. 60
Functional subunit is called a lobule which is derived from a tertiary
stem villi. About 60 stem villi persist in human placenta. Thus each
cotyledon (total 15 - 29) contains 3 - 4 major stem villi. The villi are
the functional unit of the placenta. The total villi surface, for
exchange, approximately varies between 10 to 14 square metres.
The fetal capillary system within the villi is almost 50 km long.
1531. Uterus is receptive for implantation for
      how many days after fertilization -
 a) 6 days

 b) 12 days

 c) 6 weeks

 d) 12 weeks



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. 12 weeks
Superfetation is the fertilization of two ova released in two different
menstrual cycles. The nidation and development of one fetus over
another fetus is theoretically possible until the decidual space is
obliterated by 12 weeks of pregnancy.
1532. Human placenta is ?
 a) Discoid

 b) Hemochorial

 c) Deciduate

 d) All the above



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., All the above
The human placenta is :
Discoid, because of its shape.
Hemochorial, because of direct contact of the chorion with the
maternal blood andDeciduate, because some maternal tissue is
shed at parturition.
1533. All are true about uteroplacental
      circulation except
 a) Blood in the intervillous space is completely replaced 3 - 4
    times per minute

 b) The villi depend on the maternal blood for their nutrition

 c) A mature placenta has 150 ml of blood in the villi system and
    350 ml of blood in the intervillous space

 d) Intervillous blood flow at term is 500 - 600 ml per minute



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. A mature placenta has 150 ml of blood in the villi
system and 350 ml of blood in the intervillous space
A mature placenta has a volume of about 500 ml of blood; 350 ml
being occupied in the villi system and 150 ml lying in the intervillous
space.
Intervillous blood flow at term is around 500 - 600 ml per minute.
The blood in the intervilllous space is completely replaced about 3 -
4 times per minute.
The villi depend on maternal circulation for nutrition, thus it is
possible for the chorionic villi to survive for a varying period even
after the fetus is dead.
   1534. Which is increased in premature
         ovarian failure :
    a) Sr. Inhibin

    b) Sr. FSH

    c) Sr. Estradiol

    d) Both A and B



   Correct Answer - B
   Answer- B. Sr. FSH
   In premature ovarian failure :-
1. FSH level increased (40 mIU/ml or more).
2. Estrogen is decreased (E2 Level 20 pg/ml or less)
3. Inhibin B is decreased.
   [Ref Shaw's Gynaecology 10h/e p. 74; Speroffs Clinical
   Gynaecologic Endocrinology and Infertility 5th/e p. 463]
1535. All of the following are markers of
      ovarian reserve except -
 a) Inhibin A

 b) Estradiol concentration

 c) Inhibin B

 d) Ovarian volume



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Inhibin A
Basal FSH and Estradiol concentration
Clomiphene Citrate Challenge Test
Inhibin B
Antimullerian hormone
Antral follicle count
Ovarian volume
1536. Most common site involved in genital
      TB -
a) Fallopian tubes

b) Endometrium

c) Ovaries

d) Vulvo - vaginal part



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Fallopian tubes
Fallopian Tubes → 90 - 100
1537. Which is not a side effect of POP
      [Progestin only pill]
 a) Ovarian cysts

 b) Venous thromboembolism

 c) Increased risk of diabetes mellitus

 d) Ectopic pregnancy



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Venous thromboembolism
Adverse effects of progestin only pill (minipill)
Menstural irregularities
Headache, nausea, dizziners
Bloating or weight gain
Increased risk of INDDM
Ovarian cysts
Breast tenderness
Acne
Ectopic pregnancy
1538. Maternal age is not associated with -
 a) Preterm labour

 b) Post maturity

 c) Aneuploidy

 d) Hydatidiform mole



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Preterm labour
Recent evidence however suggests lowest incidence of preterm
labor between 18 and 35 years of age and higher risk in lower and
higher age groups.
1539. What is to be done if 2 OCP is missed
      on day 17 - 18 of the cycle -
 a) Take 2 pills on the next 2 days

 b) Use back up contraceptive

 c) Both a and b

 d) Continue taking single pill per day



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Use back up contraceptive
Missing pills while on OCP - Management :
Missing one pill (late upto 24 hours) -take the missed pill at once and
continue the same regimen.
Missing two pills in the first week (days 1 - 7) - take two pills on each
of the next two days and then continue the schedule. Extra -
precaution (back up) - alternative contraception
Missing two pills in the third week (days 15 - 21) or if more than two
pills are missed at any time - another form of contraception. Start the
next pack without a break.
Missing any of the 7 inactive pills - throw away the missed pills. Start
the new pack as usual.
1540. Most common complication of dermoid
      cyst is -
 a) Cyst Rupture

 b) Torsion

 c) Malignant degeneration

 d) None of the above



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Torsion
Torsion is the most common complication occurring in Dermoid cyst.
Because of the fat content of the cyst, it is lighter than other ovarian
tumors and therefore easily torsioned. Almost 15% of dermoid cysts
undergo torsion.
1541. Cause of unilateral dysmenorrhea :
 a) One horn of malformed uterus

 b) Endometriosis with unilateral distribution

 c) Small fibroid at the utero tubal junction

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - D
All of the above
Causes of unilateral dysmenorrhea :
One horn of malformed uterus
Endometriosis with unilateral distribution
Small fibroid at the utero - tubal junction.
Ovarian dysmenorrhea
Right ovarian vein syndrome
Colonic or caecal spasm.
  1542. Management of tubal ectopic pregnancy
        of 2.5 x 3 cm is -
   a) Medical management

   b) Salpingectomy

   c) According to presence of fetal cardiac activity

   d) Observation



   Correct Answer - C
   Answer- C. According to presence of fetal cardiac activity
   Conservative management
   Medical management :
1. Hemodynamically stable
2. Serum hCG level < 3000IU/L
3. Tubal diameter < 4 cm without any fetal cardiac activity
4. No intraabdominal haemorrhage
   Surgical management :
1. Hemodynamic instability
2. Serum hCG level > 3000 IU/L
3. Tubal diameter > 4 cm
4. Presence of fetal cardiac activity
1543. Dose of dexamethasone for fetal lung
      maturity is -
 a) 6 mg

 b) 12 mg

 c) 18 mg

 d) 24 mg



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. 6 mg
Betamethasone - 12 mg i.m. 24 hours apart for 2 doses
Dexamethasone - 6 mg i.m. 12 hours apart for 4 doses.
Betamethasone - Steroid of choice.
1544. Most common cause of secondary PPH
      is :
 a) Uterine inertia

 b) Retained placenta

 c) Episiotomy

 d) Cervical tear



Correct Answer - B
Retained placenta
Secondary PPH
Bleeding usually occurs between 8th to 14th day of delivery.
Causes of late PPH :
Retained bits of cotyledon or membranes (M.C.)
 Infection and separation of slough over a deep cervico - vaginal
laceration.
 Endometritis and subinvolution of the placental site.
1545. Management of a patient with complete
      placenta previa at 38 weeks gestation
      without any vaginal bleeding is -
 a) Expectant management

 b) Macafee and Johnson regimen

 c) Elective caesarean section

 d) Emergency caesarean section



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Elective caesarean section
As this patient is more than 37 weeks gestation, active interference
is mandatory.
But as this patient is not actively bleeding therefore elective
caesarean section can be planned.
1546. True about nabothian cyst is all except -
      �
 a) Squamous epithelium occludes the mouth of the glands

 b) It is seen in chronic irritation and inflammation

 c) It is a pathology of the cervix

 d) It is pre - malignant



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D.�It is pre - malignant
Seen in chronic inflammation of cervix.
It is the result of blockage of mouth of the glands of the cervix.
During the process of healing, the squamous epithelium replaces the
columnar epithelium.
The blocked glands become distended with secretion and form small
cysts which can be seen with the naked eye, the so-called nabothian
follicles.
The condition is neither malignant nor pre-malignant.
1547. Most common cause of pelvic
      inflammatory disease is -
 a) Sexually transmitted disease

 b) IUCD

 c) Pelvic peritonitis

 d) Puerperal sepsis



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Sexually transmitted disease
Sexually transmitted disease is the most common cause.
Gonococcal and chlamydial infections are the most common cause.
Postabortal or puerperal sepsis.
IUCD
Tuberculosis
Pelvic peritonitis, due to appendicitis and diverticulitis.
1548. There is overlapping of skull sutures
      which can be reduced with gental
      pressure. What is the grade of moulding
      ?
 a) Grade 1

 b) Grade 2

 c) Grade 3

 d) Grade 4



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Grade 2
There are three gradings of moulding :
Grade 1 - the bones touching but not overlapping
Grade 2 -overlapping but easily separated
Grade 3 - fixed overlapping.
1549. Risk factor for cervical carcinoma is -
 a) Smoking

 b) Human papilloma virus

 c) Low socioeconomic status

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. All of the above
HPV infection.
Coitus before 18 years.
Multiple sexual partners.
Delivery of the first baby before the age of 20 years.
Multiparity with poor birth spacing between pregnancies.
Poor personal hygiene.
Poor socioeconomic status.
Smoking.
Immunosupressive disease.
1550. What is the stage of carcinoma cervix
      involving body of uterus -
 a) Stage I

 b) Stage II

 c) Stage III

 d) Stage IV



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Stage I
Cervical Cancer - FIGO Staging
Stage
        Carcinoma in situ
0
Stage I Intraepithelial carcinoma confined to the cervix
Stage
        Diagnosed only by microscopy
IA
Stage Microinvasiva carcinoma with stromal invasion < 3 mm in
IA1     depth & < 7 mm in wide.
Stage Microinvasiva carcinoma not exceeding 5 mm in depth /7
IA2     mm in width.
Stage
        Clinically visible or microscopic lesion > IA2.
IB
Stage
        Clinical lesion not exceeding 4cm in diameter.
IB1
Stage
        Clinical lesion more then 4 cm in diameter.
IB2
Stage
        Extension beyond the cervix but not to the pelvic wall.
II
Stage
        Involvement of vagina but not the lower third.
IIA
      Involvement of vagina but not the lower third.
IIA
Stage
      Clinically visible lesion more then 4 cm.
IIA1
Stage
      Clinically visible lesion more then 4 cm.
IIA2
Stage
      Parametrial involvement not reaching the pelcvic side wall.
IIB
1551. Most common cause of death in
      cervical cancer is -
 a) Renal failure

 b) Infection

 c) Haemorrhage

 d) Metastasis to vital organs



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Renal failure
Renal failure is the most common cause of death in cervical cancer.
Renal failure in cervical cancer occurs due to involvement of ureters
in Stage 1IIB. It can also occur due to direct involvement of kidney
as in stage IV B.
   1552. Treatment options for CIN III include all
         of the following except -
    a) LLETZ

    b) Conization

    c) Hysterectomy

    d) Wertheim's hysterectomy



   Correct Answer - D
   Answer- D. Wertheim's hysterectomy
   Treatment options of (IN III
1. Conservative ablation : coagulation, cryoscrgery, laser ablation
2. Local excision : conization, laser conization, lleT2, LEEP, NETZ
3. Radical excision : Trachelectomy, hystrectomy (with or without
   removal of vaginal cuff).
   Wertheim's hysterectomy is generally not done in cases of CIN III if
   vagina or lymph nodes are not involved.
1553. A 40 year old woman presents with
      abnormal cervical cytology on PAP
      smear suggestive of CIN III (HSIL). The
      next best step in management is:
 a) Hysterectomy

 b) Colposcopy and LEEP

 c) Colposcopy and Cryotherapy

 d) Conization



Correct Answer - B
According to FIGO classification, cervical intraepithelial neoplasia 3
(CIN 3) belong to stage 0.
Loop electrocautery excision procedure done under colposcopic
visualization is the mode of treatment for CIN II and CIN III lesions.

Ref: Novak's, 14th Edition, Page 582, 583; William's Gynoecology,
1st Edition, Page 635; COGDT, 10th Edition, Pages 841, 837;
Dewhurst's, 6th Edition, Pages 575, 574.
1554. What size of the hegar's dilator if
      passed through the internal os can be
      labeled as cervical incompetence?
 a) 4

 b) 6

 c) 8

 d) 10



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. 8
Passage without resistance and pain of No. 8 Hegar's dilator is a
screening test for cervical incompetence.
1555. Funneling in cervicogram is seen in -
 a) In labour

 b) Cervical incompetence

 c) Cervical ectopic

 d) During TVS



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Cervical incompetence
Cervicogram is done for diagnosis of cervical incompetence. In other
conditions, cervicogram is not done.
1556. In cervical incompetence diameter of
      internal os of cervix is -
 a) 1 cm

 b) 1.5 cm

 c) 2 cm

 d) 2.5 cm



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. 1 cm
Cervical sonography :
Funelling of the cervix with changes in the form of Y, V, U.
Cervical length < 2.5 cm.
Funnelling of the internal os > 1 cm
Speculum examination : Detection of dilatation of internal os with
herniation of the membranes.
Cervical index = (Funnel length + 1) / (endocervical length).
The "+1" allows an index to be calculated when funelling is absent.
Predictors of preterm birth :
Cervical index > 0.52.
Cervical length < 18 mm
Funnel length > 9 mm.
Funnel width > 6 mm.
1557. Contracted pelvis is defined as
      shortening of one or more planes by -
 a) 0.5 cm

 b) 1 cm

 c) 1.25 cm

 d) 1.5 cm



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. 0.5 cm
Anatomically, contracted pelvis is defined as shortening of one or
more planes by 0.5 cm.
1558. Vasa previa is associated with -
 a) Marginal placenta

 b) Velamentous placenta

 c) Battledore

 d) Placenta previa



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Velamentous placenta
If a leash of blood vessels happen to traverse through the
membranes overlying the internal is, in front of the presenting part,
the condition is called as vasa praevia.
It is associated with velamentous placenta.
The unsupported umbilical vessels in velamentous placenta, lie
below the presenting part and run across the cervical os.
Rupture of membranes involving the overlying vessels leads to
vaginal bleeding.
As it is entirely fetal blood, this may result in fetal exsanguination
and even death.
[Ref Dutta's Obstetrics 8th/e p. 301]
1559. First symptom invulval cancer is-
a) Pain

b) Pruritis

c) Ulcer

d) Blood discharge



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B.Pruritis
Women with WN and yulvar cancer commonly present with pruritus
and a visible lesion.
However, pain, bleeding, and ulceration may also be initial
complaints'
1560. Most common type of conjoint twin is -
a) Thoracopagus

b) Omphalopagus

c) Craniopagus

d) Rachipagus



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Thoracopagus
Four types of fusion may occur :
Thorapagus - Most common
Pyopagus (posterior fusion)
Craniopagus (cephalic)
Ischiopagus (caudal)
1561. Uterine height is greater than
      gestational age of the patient in a case
      of all except -
 a) Fibroid uterus

 b) IUGR

 c) Wrong dates

 d) Polyhydramnios



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. IUGR
Uterine height greater than gestational age in case of :
Wrong dates
Polyhydramnios
Pregnancy with fibroid uterus
Multiple pregnancy
1562. Pregnancy is contraindicated in which
      cardiac disease -
 a) Mitral stenosis

 b) Primary pulmonary hypertension

 c) VSD

 d) Mitral regurgitation



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Primary pulmonary hypertension
Place of therapeutic termination in case of following heart diseases.
Considering high maternal deaths, absolute indications are :
Primary pulmonary hypertension
Eisenmenger's syndrome
Pulmonary veno - occlusive disease.
1563. Following delivery, tear involves
      perineum, external anal spincter with
      intact mucosa, grade of tear is -
 a) First degree

 b) Second degree

 c) Third degree

 d) Fourth degree



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Third degree
Third degree : Injury to perineum, involving the anal sphincter
complex (both the external and internal).
3a : if half thickness external anal sphincter involved.
3b : if full thickness external anal sphincter involved.
3c : if internal anal sphincter involoved.
1564. Not a cause of oligohydramnios -
 a) IUGR

 b) Renal agenesis

 c) Amnion nodosum

 d) Chorioangioma



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Chorioangioma
Fetal,
Chromosomal or structural anamolies
Renal agenesis
Obstructive uropathy
Spontaneous rupture of membrane
Intrauterine infection
Drugs: PG inhibitors, ACE inhibitors
Postmaturity
IUGR
Amnion nodosum
Maternal
Hypertensive disorders
Uteorplacental insufficiency
Dehydration
Idiopathic
1565. False about chorionic vinous sampling
      -
 a) Is used for prental genetic diagnosis

 b) Is performed only in second trimester of pregnancy

 c) Villi collected from chorion frondosum

 d) Can cause limb deformities



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Is performed only in second trimester of pregnancy
Is used for prenatal genetic diagnosis.
Performed transcervically through 10-12 weeks (first trimester) and
transabdominally from 10 weeks to term. (Advantage over
amniocentesis which is performed in second trimester of pregnancy)
Villi are collected from chorion frondosum.
Can cause oromandibular limb deformities or limb reduction defects
if performed before 10 weeks of gestation.
1566. A 28 year old primigravida with 32
      weeks of gestation comes with
      complain of thin, frothy, profuse
      discharge through the vagina since
      yesterday. She was advised USG which
      showed Single live intrauterine
      gestational sac with FL and AC
      corresponding to the weeks of
      gestation and AFI as adequate.What is
      the diagnosis?
 a) PPROM

 b) Trichomoniasis

 c) Normal finding

 d) Candidiasis



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Trichomoniasis
Patients infected with Trichomonas vaginalis complain of a typical
discharge, which is thin, profuse, frothy, irritating, creamy or slight
green in colour.
Slight green colour of the discharge is often not complained by the
patient but spotted by the physician.
   1567. Risk factors for molar gestation are all
         of the following except -
    a) Oriental countries

    b) Disturbed maternal immune mechanism

    c) Higher ratio of maternal/paternal chromosomes

    d) Faulty nutrition



   Correct Answer - C
   Answer- C. Higher ratio of maternal/paternal chromosomes
   Risk factors for H. mole :
1. Oriental countries, highest incidence in Philippines.
2. Teenage pregnancies or > 35 years.
3. Faulty nutrition.
4. Disturbed maternal immune mechanism.
5. Higher ratio of paternal/maternal chromosomes (not
   maternal/paternal)
   Higher the ratio, greater the molar change. Complete moles show
   2:0 paternal/maternal ratio whereas partial mole shows 2 : 1 ratio.
1568. Poor prognostic factor for hydatidiform
      mole is -
 a) Prior molar pregnancy

 b) Metastasis to lung

 c) No prior chemotherapy

 d) WHO score > 8



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. WHO score > 8
High Risk (Poor Prognosis) :
Long duration of disease (> 4 months)
Initial serum hCG level > 40,000 mIU/ml
Brain or liver metastasis
Failure of prior chemotherapy
Following term pregnancy
WHO score > 8
1569. Drugs used in endometriosis is
 a) Combined oral contraceptives

 b) Letrozole

 c) Mifepristone

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. All of the above
Combined oral contraceptives - Administered intermittently or
continuously, oral contraceptives may alleviate the disease.
Oral progestogens - Exert anti - estrogenic effect and their
continuous administration causes decidualization and endometrial
atrophy.
Danazol - inhibits pituitary gonadotropins
GnRH analogues - Downregulate and suppress pituitary
gonadotropins.
Aromatase inhibitors (letrozole) : Anti - estrogenic action
Anti - progestin (mifepristone)
1570. Embryo gets implanted at what stage of
      development?
 a) Two cell stage

 b) Four cell stage

 c) Morula

 d) Blastocyst



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Blastocyst
After the zygote formation, typical mitotic division of the nucleus
occurs producing two blastomeres.
Two cell stage is reached approximately 30 hours after fertilization.
The blastomeres continue to divide by binary division through 4, 8,
16 cell stage until a cluster of cells is formed and is called morula,
resembling a mulberry.
Morula after spending about 3 days in the uterine tube enters the
uterine cavity through the narrow uterine ostium (1mm) on the 4th
day in the 16 - 64 cell stage.
Implantation occurs on the 6th day which corresponds to the 20th
day of regular menstrual cycle.
Implantation occurs through 4 stages : apposition, adhesion,
penetration and invasion.
1571. Leydig cells of fetus testis secretes
 a) hCG

 b) LH

 c) Testosterone

 d) Mullerian inhibiting substance



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Testosterone
Leydig cells in fetal testis are the cellular site of testosterone
synthesis.
Fetal testis also secretes mullerian inhibiting substance produced by
sertoli cells which acts locally as a paracrine factor to cause
mullerian duct regression. Mullerian duct regression completes by 9
to 10 weeks' gestation, which is much before testosterone secretion
has commenced.
1572. Le Fort repair is done for
 a) Uterovaginal descent

 b) Vault prolapse

 c) VVF

 d) RVF



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Uterovaginal descent
Le Forte's repair
Very elderly menopausal women
Advanced prolapse
Unfit for any major surgical procedure
[Ref Shaw's Gynaecology 16th/e p. 360]
1573. Bacteria responsible for ectopic
      pregnancy is
 a) Staphylococcus

 b) Chlamydia

 c) Peptostreptococcus

 d) Trichomonas vaginalis



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Chlamydia
Salpingitis and PID (Pelvic Inflammatory Disease) is the most
important risk factor for ectopic pregnancy. Chlamydia trachomatis
infection is the most common risk factor for PID and salpingitis.
[Ref Dutta's Obstetrics 8th/e p.. 207]
1574. Most common site of Implantation of
      tubal pregnancy is :
 a) Interstitial portion of fallopian tube

 b) Isthmus

 c) Ampulla

 d) Infundibulum



Correct Answer - C
Ampulla
Maximum propensity to rupture —> Isthmic ectopic pregnancy.
Minimum propensity to rupture -3 Ampullary ectopic pregnancy.
1575.
In which part of fallopian tube ectopic pregnancy will have longest survival?

 a) Isthmus

 b) Ampulla

 c) Cornua

 d) Interstitium



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Interstitium
If the implantation occurs in the antimesenteric border in the
ampulla, the pregnancy may continue a little longer time.
Earliest interruption occurs in the isthmial implantation and
pregnancy may continue upto 3-4 months in interstitial
implantation.
Also know:
Isthmic rupture usually occurs at 6-8 weeks, the ampullary one at 8-
12 weeks and the interstitial one at about 4 months.
Ref: Textbook of Obstetrics by DC Dutta, 6th edition, Page 181.
   1576. Which of the following is true about
         ovarian ectopic pregnancy?
    a) Studdiford criteria is used for diagnosis

    b) There should be no rent on the ovary or tube

    c) Absence of evidence of pregnancy at any other site than
       ovarian

    d) Conservative surgery can be done if diagnosed early



   Correct Answer - D
   Answer- D. Conservative surgery can be done if diagnosed
   early
   Ovarian ectopic is a rare entity that is difficult to diagnose clinically. It
   usually does not proceed past the first four weeks of pregnancy.
   Spiegelberg's criteria is used for diagnosis of ovarian
   pregnancy. It includes :
1. Tube on the affected side must be intact.
2. The gestation sac must be in the position of the ovary.
3. The gestation sac is connected to the uterus by the ovarian
   ligament.
4. The ovarian tissue must be found on its wall on histological
   examination.
1577. Plane of cleavage during placental
      separation runs through
 a) Between compact and spongy layer of decidua basalis

 b) Between decidua basalis and chorion frondosum

 c) Through deep spongy layer of decidua basalis

 d) Between layers of chorion frondosum



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Through deep spongy layer of decidua basalis
Marked retraction reduces effectively the surface area at the
placental site to about its half. But as the placenta is inelastic, it
cannot keep pace with such an extent of diminution resulting in its
buckling. A shearing force is instituted between the placenta and the
placental site which brings about its ultimate separation.
1578. Amsel criteria is for
 a) Bacterial vaginosis

 b) Antiphospholipid antibody syndrome

 c) Ovarian ectopic pregnancy

 d) HELLP Syndrome



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Bacterial vaginosis
Amsel criteria : Three out of four of the following should be
present
A white / gray homogenous discharge
A vaginal discharge pH of > 4.5
A positive amine test (drop of 10% potassium hydroxide added to
drop of discharge on a slide produces fishy odour), also known as
Whiff test.
Microscopy demonstrates clue cells.
  1579. True about Keratinocyte is ?
    a) Ectoderm derived cell

    b) Present only in basal layer

    c) Mature in basal layer

    d) Differentiate in basal layer



   Correct Answer - A
   Ans. A. Ectoderm derived cell
   The principal cells of epidermis are keratinocytes.
   Keratin filament is the hallmark of keratinocytes. Keratinocytes has
   following features:
1. Proliferate (divide) in basal layer
2. Differentiation occurs in stratum sPinosum and stratum granulosum.
3. Completely mature and die in stratum corneum.
   So, keratinocytes are present in all four layers of epidermis,
   Keratinocytes are derived from ectoderm.
1580. Odland bodies are seen in which layer
                 of epidermis?
 a) Basal cell layer

 b) Prickle cell layer

 c) Stratum granulosum

 d) Stratum corneum



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Stratum granulosum
Odland bodies are membrane coated granules in stratum
granulosum, which contain lipids which is responsible for barrier
function of this layer.
This layer also contains diamond shaped keratohyaline granules,
which are the characteristic features of this layer.
These keratohyaline granules contain filaggrin protein which is
responsible for aggregation of keratin filaments.
1581. Anagen phase of the hair indicates:
 a) The phase of activity and growth

 b) The phase of transition

 c) The phase of resting

 d) The phase of degeneration



Correct Answer - A
A i.e. The phase of activity & growth
1582. A girl about to marry has comedonal
      acne. Drug to treat such a case is:
      March 2013
 a) Topical antibiotic

 b) Benzoyl peroxide

 c) Retinoids

 d) Estrogen



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C i.e. Retinoids
Retinoids are mainly comedolytic
Acne
Comedones are characteristic of: Acne vulgaris
Comedones are:
* Small cysts,
* formed in hair follicles,
* due to blockage of the follicular orifice
* by the retention of sebum and keratinous material
Acen vulgaris is caused by: Obstruction of pilosebaceous duct
Nodulocystic acne (NA)
Treatment of NA: Isotretinonin (synthetic retinoic acid)
   1583. In which of the following phototherapy
         is useful in treatment ?
    a) Psoriasis

    b) Tinea corporis

    c) Pemphigus

    d) PMLE



   Correct Answer - A
   Ans. A. Psoriasis
   lndications for PUVA and UVB
1. Established major indications :- Psoriasis, atopic dermatitis, vitiligo,
   mycosisfungoides, Polymorphic light eruption, pompholyx.
2. Less frequently treated (less evidence of effectiveness) :- Pityriasis
   rosea, morphea, chronic urticaria, Pityriasis lichenoid chronica,
   Alopecia totalis & Universalis, Lichen planus, Pityriasis rubra pilaris,
   Granuloma annulare, Generalized pruritis, Nacrobiosis lipoidics.
1584. Acanthosis nigricans is characterized
      by all of the following except ?
 a) Common in obese people

 b) Associated with thick skin with hyperpigmentaion

 c) Histologically there is hypermelanosis

 d) May be a sign of internal malignancy



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Histologically there is hypermelanosis
Acanthosis nigricans is brown to black discolouration which usually
affects body folds like axilla, groin, umblicus, forehead.
Acanthosis nigricans occurs in individuals younger than 40 years of
age.
It is associated with obesity (most common); endocrinopathy like
insulin resistance DM, hypothyroidism, Bloom synd., PCOD, and
internal malignancy e.g. gastric adenocarcinoma.
Histopathologically, Papillomatosis is the characteristic feature
whereas there is no hypermelanosis.n
1585. After hepatitis B vaccination child with
      allergic family history and pruritis
      involving face & convexities developed
      numerous umblicated vesicles; which
      became pustular & haemorhagic &
      crusted. After 2 days child developed
      high fever and lymphadenopathy. The
      diagnosis is
 a) Secondary infected atopic dermatitis

 b) Molluscum contagiosum

 c) Eczema herpaticum

 d) Eczema vaccinatum



Correct Answer - C
C. i.e. Eczema herpaticurrtx
* Eczema herpeticum or Kaposi's varicelliform eruption results from
wide spread (usually) primary HSV- 1 (herpes simplexl) infection in
skin damaged by atopic dermatitis (eczema)Q.
* Patients with atopic eczema may develop severe orofacial herpes
simplex virus (HSV) infectionQ (eczema herpaticum), which may
rapidly involve extensive areas of skin & occasionally disseminate to
visceral organs. Systemic acyclovir or valaciclovir is treatment of
choice.
* In atopic dermatitis patients, small pox vaccination or even
exposure to vaccinated individual, may cause severe wide spread
erruption (k/a eczema vaccinatum) that resembles to eczema
herpaticum.
* Kaposis varicelliform eruptions manifest either as - eczema
herpeticum or eczema vaccinatum.
                 Causative
Disease
                Virus
            HSV-1 (Herpes
Eczema
            simplex
            honimis
herpeticum
            virus)Q
Eczema      Vaccinia virus
vaccinatumdue to
            inadvertent
            vaccination of
            small pox
            with live virus
            vaccine
Milker's
            Paravaccinia /
node
            Pseudocowpox
  1586. Epidermal nevus follows ?
    a) Blaschko's lines

    b) Langer's lines

    c) Vasculature

    d) Lymphatics



   Correct Answer - A
   Ans. A. Blaschko's lines
   Blaschko's lines correspond to the pathways followed by
   keratinocytes migrating from the neural crest during embryogenesis.
   Lines of Blaschko represent non-random lines of development of
   skin.
   Epidermal nevus follow the Blaschko's line
   The skin lesions that follow the Blaschko's lines are -
1. Pigmented disorders:- Nevus achromicus (including Hypomelanosis
   of ito), Epidermal nevus (Nevus sebaceous, Inflammatory linear
   verrucous nevus).
2. X-linked genetic skin conditions:- Incontinentia pigmenti, CHILD
   syndrome.
3. Acquired inflammatory skin rashes:- Lichen striatus, Lichen planus,
   lupus erythematosus.
4. Chimerism
1587. Which of the following organism has a
      role to play in Seborrhic dermatitis ?
 a) Pityrosporum ovale

 b) Canida albicans

 c) Propionibacterium

 d) None of the above



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Pityrosporum ovale
Malasezia furfur or its yeast form Pityrosporum ovale plays an
etilogicalrole in Seborrhic dermatitis."
1588. Pruritus is a feature of which of the
      following ?
 a) Pemphigus foliaceous

 b) Pemphigus vulgaris

 c) Bullous Pemphigoid

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Bullous Pemphigoid
Diseases causing mild or no itching: Psonasis, Pityriasis rosea, SLE,
parapsoriasis, Secondary syphilis, Pemphigus.
Diseases causing moderate itching: Contact dermatitis, Dry skin,
Bullous pemphigoid, Photosensitivity (sunburn).
Diseases causing severe itching: Lichen planls, Lichen simplex
chronicus, Herpes gestationis, Mastocytosis, Dermatitis
herpetiformis, scabies, Prurigo nodularis.
1589. Goekarman regimen used in for
      treatment of psoriasis is?
 a) UVB plus coal tar

 b) UVB plus anthralin

 c) Coal tar plus anthralin

 d) UVB plus methotrexate



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. UVB plus coal tar
Goekerman regimen was invented for the treatment of mild to
moderate psoriasis.
In this therapy application of crude coal tar application for 2-10 hours
is followed by exposure to UVB light.
Treatment is now obsolete.
Similarly UVB plus anthralin combination is known as Ingram
regimen.
1590. Among various types of psoriatic
      arthrirtis, which variety is most
      common ?
 a) Classic

 b) Oligoarticular

 c) Rheumatoid

 d) Spondylitis



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Oligoarticular
Psoriatic arthritis (Affects 5-1Och of psoriatic patients)
Classic or polyarticular type (16%):- affects DIP joints with “sausage
shape apearance"of fingers
and toes. Nail involvement is common.
Monoarticular or oligoarticular type (70%) most common type,
affects large joints like knee.
Rheumatoid type (15%) :- RA like presentation. Symmetrical.
 Affects PIP joints leading to "swan neck deformity."
Axial type or spondylitis :- associated with HLA - B27.
1591. Drug of choice for bubos in a pregnant
      female is ?
 a) Tetracycline

 b) Doxycycline

 c) Ceftriaxone

 d) Erythromycin



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Erythromycin
Buboes are most commonly caused by LGV.
Doxycycline/tetracycline is the drug of choice for LGV in a non-
pregnant female.
In a pregnant female and children below 8 years, it should be treated
with erythromycin.
   1592. Which 'P' is not a feature of lichen
         planus ?
    a) Polygonal

    b) Polyhedral

    c) Pruritus

    d) Plane



   Correct Answer - B
   Ans. B. Polyhedral
   5 characteristic 'P’ of lichen planus
1. Pruritic (itching)
2. Polygonal
3. Purple (violaceous)
4. Plane (flat topped)
5. Papule or plaque
   These 5 Ps are the characteristic features of lichen planus lesions
   presentation.
1593. In lichen planus all the following sites
      are affected except ?
 a) Flexor aspect of upper extrimities

 b) Oral mucosa

 c) Nails

 d) Extensor aspect of upper extrimities



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Extensor aspect of upper extrimities
Sites of involvement in lichen planus
Flexors aspect of upper extremities and legs are the most common
site involved.
Oral mucosa involvement may lead to lacy pattern of lesions
Nail involvement may cause pterygium (most characteristic),
onychorrhexia, nail atrophy, anychia.
Hair involvement cause scaring alopecia
Inverse lichen planus affects axillae, groin, infraaxillary areas.
1594. Not a hemorrhagic lesion ?
 a) Petechiae

 b) Echymosis

 c) Plaque

 d) None of the above



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Plaque
Petechiae are small pin point purpuric macular lesions that occur
due to extravasation of red blood cells from cutaneous vessels into
the skin.
Echryosis are larger bruise like hemorrhagic lesions. Cause is
generally non inflammatory.
Plaque is a solid plateau like elevation that occupies a large surface
area in comparison to its height above the normal skin and has a
diameter more than 0.5 cms. There is no hemorrhage involved as
such
1595. Maculae cerulea is seen in ?
 a) Pediculosis hominis corporis

 b) Pediculosis capitis

 c) Scabies

 d) Lupus erythematosus



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Pediculosis hominis corporis
Maculae cerulea:
This is a latin name for blue-grey macula.
Pathognomic of lice infestation (Pediculosis corporis and
Pediculosispthiris)
They are hemosiderin-stained purpuric spots at the site of insect
bite.
Enzymes in insect salive breaks down human bilirubin to biliverdin,
causing the color change in the skin.
1596. Incontinentia pigmenti involves all
      exept ?
a) Skin

b) Bones

c) Teeth

d) Heart



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Heart
Incontinentia pigmenti (also k/a Bloch-Sulzberger syndrome) is
a X-linked dominant genetic disorder. It involves
Skin (100% of affected people)
Teeth (80-90 % of affectedpeople)
Bones (30-40% of affected people)
CNS i.e. brain & spinal cord (30-40% of affected people)
Eyes (25-35% of affected people)
1597. Most common site for atopic dermatitis
      -
 a) Scalp

 b) Trunk

 c) Popliteal fossa

 d) Knees



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Popliteal fossa
Sites of itching patch in atopic dermatitis
Infant; Face (especially cheek), extensors offorearm& legs.
Childhood & adult > Flexures (antecubitalrbitalfoxa, Poplitealfossa).
   1598. Bull's eye lesions are found in ?
    a) Erythema nodosum

    b) Erythema gangrenosum

    c) Erythema multiforme

    d) Erythroderma



   Correct Answer - C
   Ans. C. Erythema Multiforme
   Clinical features of erythema multiforme
   Typical lesion of EM is a Target lesion (lris lesion or Bulle's eye
   lesion) which consists of three concentric components : -
1. Central dusky erythma, surrounded by vesicle bulla
2. Pale edematous ring
3. Erythematous halo
1599.
  All of the followings are part of the treatment
  of scabies except?
    a) Topical Permathrin

    b) Oral ivermactin

    c) Oral antihistamines

    d) Long term oral steroids



   Correct Answer - D
   Ans. D. Long term oral steroids
   Drugs used in scabies
1. Topical: Permethrin (drug of choice), GBH/BHC, benzyl - benzoate,
   crotamine, malathion.
2. Oral: Ivermectin.
3. For pruritis :Antihistaminics
1600. A pregnant lady comes with itchy hand
      lesions as shown. Her husband also
      gets it. The best treatment that can be
      given is ?
 a) Permathrin

 b) Ivermectin

 c) GBH

 d) Benzyl benzoate



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Permathrin
Permethrin 5% cream is considered the drug of choice for treating
scabies in patients, including pregnant women.
 Other scabicides considered safe for use during pregnancy are
sulfur 5-10% in petrolatum and crotamiton 10%.
Sulfur is effective and it has a good safety profile; however, sulfur
preparations can stain clothing and they are odorous.
Crotamiton 10% cream is not absorbed percutaneously and is
considered safe in pregnancy although it is not effective as other
therapies
1601. True regarding Bowen's disease is ?
 a) In situ BCC

 b) More common in dark skinned people

 c) HSV infection plays a role

 d) Chronic sun damage plays a role



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Chronic sun damage plays a role
Bowen's Disease
Bowen's disease is SCC in situ.
More common in fair skinned people.
More common on sun exposed areas such as head & neck followed
by limbs.
When arises on glans penis, it is called "erythroplasia of Queytat."
1602. True about pemphigus vulgaris A/E:
 a) Subepidermal

 b) Autoimmune disease

 c) Tzanck smear shows acanthoyltic cells

 d) Antibody are formed against desmogleins



Correct Answer - A
A i.e. Subepidermal
1603. Which of the following is characterized
      by a solitary painless ulcer on
      genitalia?
 a) Herpes

 b) Soft chancre [chancroid]

 c) Hard chancre

 d) Traumatic ulcer



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Hard Chancre
Characteristics of various different types of genital ulcers -
Primary syphilis (hard chancre) :- punched out, painless, non-
bleeding(avascular) ulcer with 6rm induration.
Donovanosis :- one or more, painless, bleeding (vascular) ulcers
with induration.
Chancroid (soft chancre):- multiple, painful, bleeding
(vascular)ulcers with no or soft induration.
LGV: - single, painless, non-bleeding ulcer.
Herpes genitalis: - multiple painful/asymptomatic ulcers.
1604. Lines of Blaschko represent:
 a) Lines along lymphatics

 b) Lines along blood vessels

 c) Lines along nerves

 d) Lines of development



Correct Answer - D
The lines of Blaschko are defined by a pattern determined by nevoid
representing non random lines on the human skin or mucosa.

Blaschko lines or the lines of Blaschko are thought to represent
pathways of epidermal cell migration and proliferation during the
development of the fetus.
Lines of Blaschko represent non-random developmental lines of the
skin fundamentally differing from the system of
dermatomes. They follow a'V' shape over the back, 'S' shaped
whorls over the chest, stomach, and sides, and wary shapes on the
head. The lines are belived to trace the migration of embryonic
epidermal cells. The stripes are a type of genetic mosaicism.
These lines characteristically do not follow the underlying nervous,
Vascular, muscular or lymplatic structures in the
skin. Lines of Blaschko are not ordinarily visibk, but are recognized
in several cutaneous disorders that follow these arallel streaks.

Ref: Syndromes: Rapid recognition and perioperative implications,
by Bruno Bisonnette, Page 400; Neurocutaneous disorders:
Phakomatosis and Hamartoneoplastic Syndromes, by Martino
Ruggieri, Page 364.
1605. All are true about actinic lichen planus
      except ?
 a) Associated with severe pruritus

 b) Autoimmune etiology

 c) Voilaceous brown papules

 d) Usually affects exposed areas of body



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Associated with severe pruritus
Actinic Lichen Planus (lichen planussubtropicus/tropicus / lichen
planusactinicus)
Lichen planus is an autoimmune disease.
Common in spring and summers in tropical countries.
Usually affects children and young adults
Sunlight is considered to be the predisposing factor therefore lesions
are more common on sun exposed areas (face, dorsum ofhand,
forearms and arms, nape of the neck).
Papules are hyperpigmented with voilaceous-brown with well-
definedhypopigmented border.
Pruritrus and scaling are minimal.
1606. Muehrcke lines in nails are seen in
 a) Nephrotic syndrome

 b) Barrter syndrome

 c) Nail patella syndrome

 d) Acute tubular necrosis



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Nephrotic syndrome
Muehrcke's lines are characteristic of hypoalbuminemia. Nephrotic
syndrome causes hypoalbunemia.
1607. Which of the following drug can lead to
      pemphigus?
 a) Penicillamine

 b) Isoniazid

 c) Carbamazepine

 d) Furosemide



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Penicillamine
Drugs causing pemphigus-
Penicillamine
Penicillins and Cefalosporins
Captopril,
Iodine,
Lithium
Phenophthelin,
Propanolol
Rifampicine
Phenytoin,
Phenylbutazone,
Salicylates,
Piroxicam,
Sulphonamides
1608. Periungual desquamation, which is a
      characteristic feature of Kawasaki
      syndrome, occurs at ?
 a) 1st-2nd week

 b) 2nd-3rd week

 c) 3rd-4th week

 d) 4th_5th week



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. 2nd-3rd week
Periungualdesequamation in kawasaki disease starts between 10-18
days.
1609. Arm tongue time is ?
 a) 13 secs

 b) 15 secs

 c) 20 secs

 d) 40 secs



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. 13 secs
Arm to tongue time is method for knowing the circulation time i.e.
time taken by a particle in the blood to flow from one point in
circulation to other.
It measures the linear velocity of blood.
To calculate-the arm to tongue time 5 ml of 2% of decholine is
injected into cubital vein.
As soon as drug reaches the tongue, patient feels a bitter taste.
The total time taken from arm to tongue is 13 seconds.
Similarly arm to lung time is calculated with the help of ether. It is d
seconds.
1610. Respiratory failure in a post operative
      patient is ?
 a) Type 1

 b) Type 2

 c) Type 3

 d) Type 4



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Type 3
Type 3 or perioperative respiratory failure
Increased atelectasis due to low functional residual capacity (FRC)
in the setting of abnormal abdominal wall mechanics.
Often results in type I or type II respiratory failure.
Can be ameliorated by anesthetic or operative technique, posture
posture, incentive spirometry, post -operative analgesia, attempts to
rower intra - abdominal-pressure.
   1611. Laryngeal mask airway [LMA] is
         contraindicated in?
    a) Difficult airways

    b) Ocular surgeries

    c) Pregnant female

    d) In CPR



   Correct Answer - C
   Ans. C. Pregnant female
   Contraindications of LMA
1. Conditions with high risk of aspiration. i.e.,full stomach patients,
   hiatus hernia, pregnancy.
2. Oropharyngeal abscess or mass (tumor).
3. Massive thoracic injury
4. Massive maxillofacial trauma
1612. All of the following are advantages of
      LMA except?
 a) More reliable than face mask

 b) Prevent aspiration

 c) Alternative to Endotracheal intubation

 d) Does not require laryngoscope & visualization



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Prevent aspiration
LMA is intermediate between the face mask and Endotracheal
intubation in terms of reliability,
invasiveness and facilitation of gas exchange (face mask has
minimum and endotracheal intubation has maximum).
LMA does not prevent asPiration + should not be used in full
stomach patients.
LMA can be used as an alternative to endotracheal intubation for
minor surgeries, where anaesthetist wants to avoid intubation.
LMA is introduced blindly (without laryngoscopy)
1613. Which anesthetic gas was used by WTG
      Morton in his experiment ?
 a) Nitrous oxide

 b) Ammonia

 c) Diethyl ether

 d) Trichloroethylene



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Diethyl ether
William Thomas Green Morton, a dentist and medical student at
Boston, after experimenting pon animals, gave a demonstration of
general anesthesia, In 1846.
1614. Mouth to mouth respiration provides what percentage
          of oxygen ?

 a) 10%

 b) 16%

 c) 21%

 d) 100%



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. 16%
Mouth to mouth breathing provides 0.8 to 1.2 liters of exhaled air per
breath and 16% of oxygen which is enough to sustain life.
The use of Ambu bag and room air provides 21% O2.
The American Heart Association recommends tidal volumes of 700
to 1000 mL during mouth-to-mouth ventilation, but smaller tidal
volumes of 500 mL may be of advantage to decrease the likelihood
of stomach inflation, as mouth-to-mouth ventilation gas contains only
17% oxygen, but 4% carbon dioxide.
1615. The most appropriate circuit for
      ventilating a spontaneously breathing
      infant during anaesthesia is?
 a) jackson Rees modification of Ayre's T piece

 b) Mapleson A or Magill's circuit

 c) Mapleson C or Waters to and fro canister

 d) Bains circuit



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Jackson Rees modification
1616. Best uterine relaxation is seen with ?
 a) Chloroform

 b) Nitrous oxide

 c) Ether

 d) Halothane



Correct Answer - D
Ans. 'd' i.e., Halothane
Halogenated inhalational anaesthetic agents like halothane are
powerful tocolytic agents. Halothane is anaesthetic of choice for
internal version and manual removal of placenta.
1617. Hepatotoxic agent is
 a) Ketamine

 b) Ether

 c) N20

 d) Halothane



Correct Answer - D
D i.e. Halothane
1618. Which of the following drugs produces
      dissociative anesthesia
 a) Ketamine

 b) Propofol

 c) Thiopentone

 d) Enflurane



Correct Answer - A
A i.e. Ketamine
1619. Which one of the following agents
      sensitizes the myocardium to
      catecholamines -
 a) Isoflurane

 b) Ether

 c) Halothane

 d) Propofol



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Halothane
o Halothane tends to sensitize the heart to arrhythmogenic action of
adrenaline - contraindicated in pheochromocytoma.
1620. Anesthetic agent (s) safe to use in TICP
 a) Halothane

 b) Thiopentone

 c) Ketamine

 d) Ether



Correct Answer - B
B i.e. Thiopentone
Anesthetic agents safe to use in raised intracranial pressure (ICP)
are thiopentone, propofol & etomidateQ
1621. Ketamine can be used in all of the
      situations except
 a) Status asthamaticus

 b) For analgesia & sedation

 c) Obstetric hemorrhage

 d) Ischemic heart disease



Correct Answer - D
D i.e. Ischemic heart disease
Ketamine causes profound analgesiaQ, disociative
anesthesiaQ, and emergence psychomimetic hallucinations and
delirium Q.
Ketamine increases cerebral metabolism, 02 consumption, blood
flow & intracranial pressure.Q
Ketamine
* It causes profound analgesiaQ and dissociative anesthesiaQ
(i.e. patient appears conscious e.g. eye opening, swallowing but
unable to process or respond to sensory input). Ketamine
causes Dissociative AnesthesiaQ by acting on cortex and
subcortical areas (not on RAS) l/t feeling of dissociation from ones
own body and surroundings. Post Operative Delirium and
HallucinationQ is part of this Dissociative phenomenon. Drug of
choice for post op. delirium & hallucination is Lorazepam.Q
* It is closest to being a complete anesthetic since it induces
analgesia, amnesia & unconsciousness.
* It is associated with emergence psychotomimetic side effects
(delirium, illusions, hallucination)Q. It is less common in children and
pretreatment with lorazepam (drug of choice)Q.
1622. Which of the following anesthetic agent
      is a potent bronchodilator -
 a) Propofol

 b) Ketamine

 c) Thiopentone

 d) Methoxytone



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Ketamine
Ketamine is a potent bronchodilator, therefore it is the i.v.
anaesthetic agent of choice in bronchial asthma patients.
1623. Blood : Gas partition coefficient is a
      measure of ?
 a) Potency of anaesthetic agent

 b) Speed of induction and recovery

 c) Lipid solubility of agent

 d) None



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Speed of induction and recovery
Minimum alveolar concentration (MAC) —> Measure of potency.
Blood : Gas partition coefficient Blood solubility of anaesthetic agent
and determines the speed of induction & recovery.
Oil : Gas partition coefficient -4 Lipid solubility of anaesthetic agent
and is related to potency of anaesthetic agent.
1624. At the end of anaesthesia after
      discontinuation of nitrous oxide and
      removal of endotracheal tube, 1000/0
        oxygen is administered to the patient to
        prevent:
 a) Diffusion Hypoxia

 b) Second gas effect

 c) Hyperoxia

 d) Bronchospasm



Correct Answer - A
A i.e. Diffusion Hypoxia
(Ref : Willer 8/e p656, 3401)
On discontinuation of N2O administration, nitrous oxide gas can
diffuse from blood to the alveoli, diluting O2 in the lung.
Produce an effect called “Diffusional hypoxia”.
To avoid hypoxia, 100% O2, rather than air should be administered
when N2O discontinued.
1625. Landmark for pudendal nerve block is ?
 a) Ischial tuberosity

 b) Iliac spine

 c) Sacroiliac joint

 d) None of the above



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Ischial tuberosity
Pudendal block:
When performing a transvaginal pudendal nerve block, the ischial
spine is the palpated through the wall of the vagina and the needle is
then passed through the vaginal mucous membrane toward the
ischial spine.
In a perineal pudendal nerve block, the ischial tuberosity is palpated
through the buttock and the needle is inserted into the pudendal
canal about one inch deep medial to the ischial tuberosity.
1626. Post dural puncture headache usually
      presents with in ?
 a) 0-6 Hrs

 b) 6-12 Hrs

 c) 12-72 Hrs

 d) 72-96 Hrs



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. 12-72 Hrs
Post dural puncture headache is due to CSF leak.
Typical location is bifrontal or occipital.
Headache gets worsen on sitting or upright posture and is relieved
by lying down position and abdominal pressure ).
The hallmark of postdural puncture headache i.e., association with
body position.
The onset of headache is usually 12-72 hrs following the procedure,
however, it may be seen almost immediately.
In most cases it lasts for 7_10 days.
1627. Not included in neuraxial block ?
 a) Spinal block

 b) Epidural block

 c) Bier's block

 d) Caudal block



Correct Answer - C
Ans, C. Bier's block
Central neuraxial block, as the name suggests, is the pertains to
local anaesthetics placed forwaround the nerves of the central
nervous system.
Examples are spinal anaesthesia, Epidural anaesthesia and
caudallaesthesia.
BIER’s block or intravenous regional anesthesia (IVRA) is a form of
regional anesthesia used most often for surgery of the forearm and
hand.
1628. Contraindication to neruaxial block is ?
 a) Hypertension

 b) Renal disease

 c) Clotting disorders

 d) Diabetes



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Clotting disorders
Contraindications of central neuroaxial block:
Absolute :- Infection at the site of injection, patient refusal,
coagulopathyor other bleeding disorder, severe hypovolemia,
increased ICT, severe aortic or mitral stenosis.
Relative :- Sepsis, unco-operative patient, pre-existing neurological
deficit, demyelinating lesions, severe spinal deformity, stenotic
valvular heart disease
1629. Long acting local anaesthetic ?
 a) Procaine

 b) Lignocaine

 c) Prilocaine

 d) Dibucaine



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Dibucaine
1630. Shortest acting local anesthetic agent is
 a) Procaine

 b) Lidocaine

 c) Tetracaine

 d) Bupivacaine



Correct Answer - A
A i.e. Procaine
1631. Most common cause of maternal
      mortality in spinal anesthesia is ?
 a) Allergy to local anesthesia

 b) Nerve injury

 c) High block

 d) Hypotension



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. High block
Most common cause of maternal death or brain damage in neuraxial
anesthesia claims was high block"
1632. Cauda equina syndrome is associated
      with ?
 a) Lidocaine

 b) Halothane

 c) N20

 d) Ether



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Lidocaine
Caudaequina syndrome may occur as a rare devastating
complication of spinal anesthesia due to maldistribution of injected
local anesthesiaaround caudaequina nerve roots resulting in loss
offunction ofthe lumbar plexus.
Associated with all local anesthetic like lidocaine, bupivacaine,
chlorprocaine etc.
1633. Local anaesthetic injected directly into
      the tissue ?
 a) Infiltration anaesthesia

 b) Nerve block

 c) Field block

 d) Bier's block



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Infiltration anaesthesia
o Infiltration anaesthesia is the injection of local anaesthetic directly
into tissue without taking into consideration the course of cutaneous
nerve.
1634. Composition of soda lime is:
      NaOH - Ca (OH)2 - KOH - Moisture
 a) 4% - 90% - 1% - 5%

 b) 4% - 80% - 1% - 15%

 c) 80% - 10% - 5% - 5%

 d) 15% - 80% - 1% - 4%



Correct Answer - B
Soda lime is the more common absorbent and is capable of absorbing up to 23 L of CO2
per 100 g of absorbent.
It consists primarily of calcium hydroxide (80%), along with sodium hydroxide (4%), water,
and a small amount of potassium hydroxide (1%).
Commercial soda lime has a water content of 14% to 19%.

CO2 absorbents (eg, soda lime or calcium hydroxide lime) contain hydroxide salts that are
capable of neutralizing carbonic acid. Reaction end products include heat (the heat of
neutralization), water, and calcium carbonate.

Ref: Butterworth IV J.F., Butterworth IV J.F., Mackey D.C., Wasnick J.D., Mackey D.C.,
Wasnick J.D. (2013). Chapter 3. Breathing Systems. In J.F. Butterworth IV, J.F. Butterworth
IV, D.C. Mackey, J.D. Wasnick, D.C. Mackey, J.D. Wasnick (Eds), Morgan & Mikhail's
Clinical Anesthesiology, 5e.
1635.     Suxamethonium acts through which
                    channels ?
 a) Sodium channels

 b) Potassium channels

 c) Calcium channels

 d) Chloride channels



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Sodium channels
Suxamethonium (succinylcholine) is a depolarizing neuromuscular
blocking agent which act by opening the Na+ channels at muscle
end Plate.
1636. Only available depolarizing muscle
      relaxant is ?
a) Decamethonium

b) Suxamethonium

c) Mivacurium

d) None



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Suxamethonium
Suxamethonium (succinylcholine) and decamethonium come under
depolarizing muscle relaxants.
Out of these only suxamethonium is avalaible for clinical use.
1637. All of the following statements about neuromuscular blockage produced
      by succinylcholine are true, except:

 a) No fade on Train of four stimulation

 b) Fade on tetanic stimulation

 c) No post tetanic facilitation

 d) Train of four ratio > 0.4



Correct Answer - B
Succinylcholine is a depolarizing neuromuscular blocker.
With succinylcholine no fading is observed after train of four or tetanic stimulation.
All four stimulatory responses after TOF stimulation are suppressed to the same extent.

Ref: Neuromuscular Monitoring in Clinical Practice and Research By Thomas Fuchs-Buder,
Page 16
1638. All of the following about MRI are
      correct except:
 a) MRI is contraindicated in patients with pacemakers

 b) MRI is useful for evaluating bone marrow

 c) MRI is better for calcified lesions

 d) MRI is useful for localizing small lesione in the brain



Correct Answer - C
C i.e. MRI is better for calcified lesions
* MRI is very poor in detection of calcification. It is inferior to CT
scan, mammography and x-ray in detecting calcification. That is why
it lags behind mammography in early detection of noninvasive ductal
carcinoma in situ (DCIS)Q, which most commonly
has microcalcification as its only presenting feature. And similarly it
has a very limited role in detection of renal stones and gall
stonesQ. However, it is important to note that only upto 60% of gall
stones have enough calcium density (more than that of bile) to get
visualized on CT. Becaus of its superior calcification detection
abilities, MDCT is used in Agatston scoring (Coronary calcium
scoring) of calcified plaques of coronary artery using coronary
calcium as a surrogate marker to detect the presence and measure
the amount of coronary atherosclerosis. Because with exception of
patients with renal failure calcification of arteries occurs exclusively
in context of atherosclerosis.
Similarly nonenhanced helical CT is superior to all other imaging
modalities in diagnosis of urinary tract calculiQ but at the cost of
higher radiation exposure.
Now there is no need to say that MRI is better that CT for evaluation
of bone marrow, small brain lesions, meniscus/ ligament injuries,
soft tissue tumors and meningeal pathology. But MRI is very poor in
soft tissue tumors and meningeal pathology. But MRI is very poor in
detection of calcification.
1639. Which of the following is not a
      contraindication of MRI
 a) Cardiac pacemaker

 b) Cochlear implant

 c) Ryle's tube

 d) Metallic splinter in eye



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Ryle's tube
Contraindications for MRI
A) Absolute
Electronically, magnetically, and mechanically activated implants.
Ferromagnetic or electronically operated active devices like
automatic cardioverter defibrillators.
Cardiac pacemaker
Metallic splinters in the eye.
Ferromagnetic haemostatic clips in the CNS.
B) Relative contraindications
Cochlear implants
Prosthetic heart valves
Other pacemakers, e.g., for Carotid sinus
Haemostatic clips
Insulin pumps and nerve stimulators
Non-ferromagentic stapedial implants
Lead wires or similar wires
Women with a first - trimester pregnancy
  1640. All are done to minimize radiation,
        exposure to the patient under
        fluroscopy, except
   a) Decrease in field of view

   b) Increasing the Kv of radiation

   c) Decreasing fluroscopic time

   d) Using low dose of radiation



   Correct Answer - A
   Answer- A. Decrease in field of view
   Decreasing the field of view during fluroscopy increase the
   radiation dose rate :-
1. Field of view diameter 25 cm has dose rate 0.3 mGy/s
2. Field of view diameter 17 cm has dose 0.6 mGy/s
1641. Amount of radiation exposure in 1 CT-
      scan of chest is
a) 1 mSv

b) 3 mSv

c) 5 mSv

d) 7 mSv



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. 7 mSv
CT chest causes radiation exposure of 7mSv.
CT abdomen-pelvis causes radiation exposure of 10 mSv.
CT head causes radiation exposure of 2 mSv.
1642. Which of the following is a late severe
      adverse effect of radiation therapy
 a) Nausea

 b) Erythema

 c) Anemia

 d) Osteoradionecrosis



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Osteoradionecrosis
Osteoradionecrosis is a late complication of radiation while nausea,
erythema and anemia are early complications.
  1643. Substance used for PET scan is
    a) 18FPCT

    b) Gadolinium

    c) Gastrogarfin

    d) Iodine



   Correct Answer - A
   Answer- A. 18FPCT
   Fluorine-18-labeled 2Ali-carbomethoxy-3AY-(4-chloropheny1)-8-(-3-
   fluoropropyl) nortropane (FPCT) has been synthesized as a new
   dopamine transporter imaging agent.
   Other substances used for PET scan are :
1. FDG
2. 64Cu-ATSM (4Cu diacetyl-bis(N4-methylthiosemicarbazone)
3. 18F-fluoride
4. FLT (3'-deoxy-3'-[18F]fluorothymidine)
5. FMISO (18F-fluoromisonidazole)
6. Gallium
7. Technetium-99m
8. Thallium
1644. Which common tracer in PET is usually
      administered in the form of a glucose
      sugar
 a) Oxygen 15

 b) Fluorine 18

 c) Saccharide - 12

 d) Aluminum - 12



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Fluorine 18
Fluorine-18 is used in the form of FDG in PET scan.
The most common tracer has a complicated name but is mostly
known as FDG (which stands for 2-[18F]fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose).
The biologically active molecule most commonly used for PET is 2-
deoxy-2-18F-fluoro-β-D-glucose (18F-FDG), an analogue of
glucose, for early detection of tumors.
  1645. Intraoperative radiotherapy is used in
   a) Gastric cancer

   b) Colon carcinoma

   c) Pancreatic carcinoma

   d) All of the above



   Correct Answer - D
   Answer- D. All of the above
   Intraoperative radiotherapy can be used In -
1. Pancreatic carcinoma
2. Retroperitoneal sarcomas
3. Gastric carcinoma
4. Genitourinary cancers
5. Colorectal carcinoma
6. Brain tumor
7. Head & Neck cancers
8. Some gynecological malignancies
1646. Precisely directed high dose radiation
      is used in
 a) IMRT

 b) EBRT

 c) Stereotectic radiosurgery

 d) None of the above



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. IMRT
Intensity modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) is an advanced mode
of high precision radiotherapy that utilizes computer controlled X-ray
accelerators to deliver precise radiation doses to a malignant tumour
or specific areas within the tumour.
   1647. Stereotactic radiosurgery is done for -
    a) Glioblastoma multiforme

    b) Medulloblastoma spinal cord

    c) Ependymoma

    d) AV malformation of brain



   Correct Answer - D
   Ans. is 'D' i.e., AV malformation of brain
   It is also used for-
1. Solitary cerebral metastasis
2. Arteriovenous malformation
3. Small meningiomas
4. Schwannomas
5. Pituitary adenomas
1648. Not used for internal radiotherapy
 a) Iodine-125

 b) Iodine-131

 c) Cobalt-60

 d) Iridium-192



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Iodine-131
lsotpes used for internal radiotherapy (brachy therapy)
A) Interstitial brachytherapy
Permanent implants of interstitial brachytherapy :- Cesium - 131,
Yttrium, Gold - 198 (Au - 198), 125I, Radon - 222 (Rn - 222),
Pallidum - 103 (Pd - 103).
Temporary implants of Interstitial brachytherapy :- Iridium - 192 (Ir -
192), Cesium - 137 (Cs - 137), Cobalt - 60 (Co -60), Californium,
Radium - 226 (Ra - 226), Tantolum.
1649. Radioiodine generates which type of
      radiation
 a) X-rays

 b) Alpha and beta rays

 c) Beta and gamma rays

 d) Alpha and beta rays



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Beta and gamma rays
Radioiodine generates both beta and gamma rays but predominantly
beta rays.
1650. Radioactive iodine is administered
      through which route
 a) Intravenous

 b) Subcutaneous

 c) Oral

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. All of the above
Radioactive iodine is administered orally as well as parentrally i.e.
IV, SC & IM.
1651. "Tree in bud appearance" on CT is seen
      in
 a) Pulmonary tuberculosis

 b) Silicosis

 c) Pulmonary hydatid cyst

 d) Small cell carcinoma



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Pulmonary tuberculosis
It is usually visible on standard CT, however, it is best seen on HRCT chest.
Typically the centrilobular nodules are 2-4 mm in diameter and peripheral, within 5 mm of
the pleural surface.
The connection to opacified or thickened branching structures extends proximally
(representing the dilated and opacified bronchioles or inflamed arterioles)
Associated CT findings of bronchiolitis are seen in about 70% of patients with
bronchiectasis. Small centrilobular nodular and linear branching opacities (tree-in-bud sign)
express inflammatory and infectious bronchiolitis
Pathogenesis-
The tree-in-bud sign occurs as a result of a number of processes, although often they co-
exist in the same condition:
a. bronchioles filled with pus or inflammatory exudate
e.g. pulmonary tuberculosis, aspiration bronchopneumonia

b. bronchiolitis: thickening of bronchiolar walls and bronchovascular bundle
e.g. cytomegalovirus pneumonitis, obliterative bronchiolitis

c. bronchiectasis with mucus plugging
e.g. cystic fibrosis

d. tumor emboli to centrilobular arteries (or carcinomatous endarteritis)
e.g. breast cancer, stomach cancer
e. bronchovascular interstitial infiltration
e.g. sarcoidosis, lymphoma, leukemia
1652. Investigation of choice for lung abscess
      is
 a) Chest X-ray

 b) CECT scan

 c) MRI

 d) Ultrasound



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. CECT scan
Contrast enhanced CT in usually considered to be investigation of
choice for lung abscess, showing a cavity with thick walls and
central mobile fluid. It helps to differentiate abscess from empyma,
necrotizing pneumonia, sequestration, pneumatocele or underlying
congenital abnormalities such as bronchogenic cyst.
1653. On CT chest 'halo sign' is noted in
 a) Pulmonary hydatid cyst

 b) Invasive pulmonary aspergilossis

 c) Round pneumonia

 d) Bronchiectasis



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Invasive pulmonary aspergilossis
The halo sign (HS) in chest imaging is a feature seen on lung
window settings (typically HRCT), ground glass opacity surrounding
a pulmonary nodule or mass and represents hemorrhage.
It is typically seen in angioinvasive aspergillosis.
1654.
A 50 year old male presents with fever and
malaise for 4 months& pain in the knees and
ankles. Blood tests are normal apart from a
raised ESR. Chest x-ray shows bilateral hilar
adenopathy and pulmonary infiltrates most
severe in the upper and mid zones. Mantoux
test is negative. What is the most likely
diagnosis
 a) Tuberculosis

 b) Sarcoidosis

 c) Asbestosis

 d) Berylliosis



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Sarcoidosis
Sarcoidosis is the most likely diagnosis given the presentation with
malaise, arthralgia and a chest x-ray showing bilateral hilar
adenopathy.
"The characteristic radiological finding in patients with pulmonary
sarcoidosis is bilateral hilar lymphadenopathy"
1655. 22-year-old women presents to the
      emergency department with a chief
      complaint of severe left upper quadrant
      [LUQ] pain after being punched by her
      husband. Her blood pressure is 110/76,
      her pulse is 80 bpm, and her respiration
      rate is 24 breaths per minute. The best
      means to establish a diagnosis is which
      of the following ?
 a) Four-quadrant tap of the abdomen

 b) CT of the abdomen

 c) Peritoneal lavage

 d) Upper gastrointestinal [GI] series



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. CT of the abdomen
Clinical picture of the patient in above question indicates that patient
is hemodynamically stable. Therefore best mode of evaluation
should be CT scan of abdomen to see the extent of injury.
If the patients is hemodynamically stable and can be shifted - CT
scan
1656. A 35 year-old female presented to the
      emergency department with the sudden
      onset of severe epigastric pain. She had
      a history of heart burn and dyspeptic
      symptoms for past 10 years. On
      physical exam, she had a temperature
      of 101.4°F, a pulse of 118 and a blood
      pressure of 128/72. Abdomen was
      tender & rigid. Expected finding on X-
      ray will be
 a) Blood under diaphragm

 b) Air under diaphragm

 c) Hazy lung fields

 d) Prominent markings



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Air under diaphragm
Above clinical picture is suggestive of perforated peptic ulcer, Which
is the most common cause of pneumoperitoneum (air under
diaphragm).
Perforation results in pneumoperitoneum and the best view to see
pneumoperitoneum is chest x-ray in erect position which detects air
under the domes of diaphragm.
1657. A 50 year-old chronic alcoholic male
      patient, after a large binge of alcohol,
      presented to the emergency department
      in subconscious state. He vomited
      several times, few of them mixed with
      blood. He had a history of heart burn
      and dyspeptic symptoms for past few
      tears. On physical exam, he had a
      temperature of 102°F, a pulse of 110,
      respiratory rate of 20 per minute and a
      blood pressure of 90/60. On physical
      examination there was abdominal
      guarding and tenderness. A plane erect
      chest X-ray reveals air under
      diaphragm. Probable diagnosis is
 a) Perforated peptic ulcer

 b) Acute MI

 c) Dissected abdominal aorta

 d) None of the above



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Perforated peptic ulcer
History of heart burn and dyspepsia, acute onset of bloody vomiting
after binge alcohol, general and physical examination findings and
air under diaphragm on chest X-ray, all these indicate towards the
air under diaphragm on chest X-ray, all these indicate towards the
perforation of peptic ulcer.
  1658. Ring enhancing lesion on CT is a
        feature of
   a) Toxoplasmsis

   b) Intracranial hemorrhage

   c) Cysts

   d) Hamartoma



   Correct Answer - A
   Answer- A. Toxoplasmsis
   Ring enhancing brain lesions
1. Neoplasms :- High grade glioma, meningioma, lymphoma, acoustic
   schwannoma, craniopharyngioma, metastasis.
2. Abscess :- Pyogenic, tuberculoma, toxoplasmosis, cysticercosis,
   empyema.
3. Hemorrhagic - ischemic lesion :- Resolving infarction, Aging
   hematoma, operative bed following resection.
4. Demyelinating disorder
1659. About lipoma, radiologically true is -
a) Low attenuation on CT

b) Anechoic on US

c) Hypo-intense on T1 -MRI

d) Hypo-intense on T2-MRI



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Low attenuation on CT
Lipomas are benign fat tumors which show
Variable echos on US
Hyper-intense shadows on both T1 & T2 MRI
Low attenuation on CT.
1660. Following X-ray finding is associated
      with Chilaiditi syndrome -
 a) Pseudopneumoperitoneum

 b) Pseudopneumothorax

 c) Pneumothorax

 d) Hydropneumothorax



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Pseudopneumoperitoneum
Chilaiditi syndrome is the anterior interposition of the colon (usually
tranverse colon) to the liver reaching the under-surface of the right
hemidiaphragm with associated upper abdominal pain.
It is one ofthe causes ofpseudopneumoperitoneum
1661. Which  of the following agents is used to measure Glomerular Filtration
      Rate (GFR)?

 a) Iodohippurate

 b) Tc99m-DTPA

 c) Tc99m-MAG3

 d) Tc99m-DMSA



Correct Answer - B
Tc99m-Diethylene Triamine Pentothenic Acid (DTPA) is an agent of choice widely used in
measuring GFR.

Ref: Renal Disease: Techniques and Protocols By Michael S Goligorsky, Page 87;
Paediatric Uroradiology By Richard Fotter, ALbert L Baert, Page 47
1662. Ultrasonographic finding of autosomal
      recessive polycystic kidney disease
      [ARPKD] are all except
 a) Cysts more than 2 cm

 b) Corticomedullary differentiation is eventually lost

 c) Enlarged kidney

 d) Oligohydramnios



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Cysts more than 2 cm
On antenatal ultrasound associated oligohydramnios may be
identified
Cysts
Initially too small to resolve but with time may become discernible
Unlike ADPKD the cysts rarely exceed 1-2 cm in diameter
The kidneys appear enlarged and echogenic but usually retain a
reniform shape
Medullary pyramids
1663. Cobra head appearance on excretory
      urography is suggestive of:
      March 2010
 a) Horseshoe kidney

 b) Duplication of renal pelvis

 c) Simple cyst of kidney

 d) Ureterocele



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D: Ureterocele
The term ureterocele denotes a cystic ballooning of the distal end of
the ureter. This type of ureterocele is also termed orthotopic, since it
arises from a ureter with a normal insertion into the trigone.
An intravesical ureterocele results from the prolapse of the mucosa
of the terminal segment of the ureter through the ureterovesical
orifice into the bladder.
This prolapsed ureteral mucosa carries with it a portion of the
continuous sheet of the bladder mucosa around the orifice. The
prolapsed segment thus has a wall that consists of a thin layer of
muscle and collagen interposed between the bladder uroepithelium
and the ureter uroepithelium.
Since the terminal ureteral orifice is usually narrowed and partially
obstructed, and since there is no muscle support for the double
mucosal walls of the prolapsed segment, it dilates. This dilated
segment fills with urine and protrudes into the bladder.
On excretory urography, cobra head sign is classically seen with an
intravesical ureterocele.
1664. CT of gastric Volvulus shows -
 a) Shortened twisted stomach

 b) Enlarged twisted stomach

 c) Normal twisted stomach

 d) None of the above



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Enlarged twisted stomach
CT scan of gastric Volvulus shows enlarged twisted stomach in
thorax with one or more sites of torsion. It is useful in showing the
sites of ischemia.
1665. Investigation of choice to evaluate
      intracranial hemorrhage of less than 48
      hours is -
 a) CT scan

 b) MRI

 c) PET

 d) SPECT



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. CT scan
Primary procedure of choice for evaluating intracranial complications
of acute head injury 4 CT scan.
Best modality for assessing fractures of the skull base, calvarium
and facial bone 4 CT scan.
Investigation of choice for demyelinating disorders 4 MRI.
1666. Investigation of choice for acute
      intracerebral hemorrhage is -
 a) NCCT

 b) MRI

 c) PET scan

 d) None of the above



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. NCCT
"NCCT remains the main stay of emergency imaging of stroke in
order to exclude intracranial hemorrhage".
"In investigation of stroke with delayed presentation gradient-echo
MRI is the investigation of choice for exclusion of old hemorrhage".
1667. Epidural hematoma on CT scan shows -
 a) Crescent shaped hyperdense lesion

 b) Biconvex hyperdense lesion

 c) Biconcave hyperdense lesion

 d) Crescent shaped hypodense lesion



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Biconvex hyperdense lesion
Acute extradural (epidural) hematoma is biconvex hyperdense or
mixed density lesion.
Extradural (epidural) hematoma appearance radiolgically :-
Biconvex (lens shaped or lenticular)
In Acute cases 4 Hyperdense (2/3) or mixed density (1/3).
In chronic cases 4 Hypodense
1668. Investigation of choice for acute
      subarachnoid hemorrhage is -
 a) MRI

 b) CT scan

 c) Enhance MRI

 d) Angiography



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. CT scan
Investigation of choice for acute SAH - CT scan
Investigation of choice for chronic SAH - MRI
1669. Sausage finger appearance is seen in -
a) Psoriatic arthritis

b) Rickets

c) Hyperthyroidism

d) Addison's disease



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Psoriatic arthritis
The common causes of sausage digit are :
Psoriatic arthropathy.
Ankylosing spondylitis
Tuberculosis
Osteomyelitis.
Sickle cell disease
Leprosy
1670. Skyline view X-ray is useful in
      diagnosing -
 a) Patellofemoral problem

 b) Radioulnars problem

 c) Tibiofibular problem

 d) Skull fracture



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Patellofemoral problem
A 'Skyline' or 'Sunrise' or 'sunset' or 'axial' or 'tangential' or 'mountain
view' gives most information about patellofemoral joint.
1671. Investigation of choice for optic neuritis
      is ?
 a) MRI Brain and orbit

 b) Ct scan Brain and orbit

 c) Vitreous biopsy

 d) Electooculogram



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., MRI Brain and orbit [Ref Kanski 8th/e Chap. 19, p.
784]
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) is far more superior for the
study of soft tissue and thus, for most neuro-ophthalmic conditions,
MRI is the investigation of choice.
1672. Investigation of choice for soft tissue
      sarcoma is -
 a) CT

 b) MRI

 c) Ultrasound

 d) X-ray



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. MRI
"Any patient with a suspected STS should be referred to a diagnostic
centre for triple assessment with clinical history, imaging and biopsy.
Whilst the preferred method of imaging is MRI, other options
including computerized tomography (CT) or ultrasound may be
appropriate depending on local expertise."
1673. Tigriod pattern on MRI is seen in -
 a) Wilson's disease

 b) Metachromatic leukodystrophy

 c) Parkinsonism

 d) GB syndrome



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Metachromatic leukodystrophy
It is characteristically seen in -
Metachromatic leukodystrophy
Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease
Autosomal recessive spastic ataxia of charlevoix.
1674. Theory of human motivation was given
      by ?
 a) Pavlov

 b) Abraham Maslow

 c) Alios Alzheimer

 d) Aaron Beck



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Abraham Maslow
Maslords hierarchy of needs is a theory in psyehslag proposed by
Abraham Maslow in his 1943 paper.
"A Theory Of Human Motivation" in Psychological Review.
Maslow subsequently extended to include his observations of
humans innate curiosity'.
His theories parallel many other theories of human developmental
psychology, some of which focus on describing the stages of growth
in humans.
Maslow used the terms "physiological", "safety', "beloftingness" and
love, esteem, self-actualization", and "self-transcendence" to
describe the pattern that human motivations generally have through.
1675. Illusion is:
      September 2007
 a) A false unshaken belief not keeping one's sociao​cultural
    background

 b) Perception without stimuli

 c) Abnormal perception by a sensory misinterpretation of actual
    stimulus

 d) Fear of closed spaces



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C: Abnormal perception by a sensory misinterpretation of
actual stimulus
Illusion is an abnormal perception caused by a sensory
misinterpretation of actual stimulus, sometimes precipitated by
strong emotion, e.g. fear provoking a person to imagine they have
seen an intruder in the shadows.
1676. Medical treatment for paraphillia
      includes ?
 a) SSRIs

 b) Benzodiazepines

 c) Opioids

 d) Barbiturates



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. SSRIs
Medical treatment for paraphillia -
Antidepressants, such as lithium and various selective serotonin
reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs)
Long-acting gonadotropin-releasing hormones (ie, medical
castration), such as leuprolide acetate and triptorelin
Antiandrogens (to lower sex drive)' such as
medroxyprogesteroneacetate (10 mgqt2hr, with the dosage doubled
every3 days to a maximum of 200 mg/day, then maintained for I
month and adjusted as necessary).
Phenothiazines, such as fluphenazine
Mood stabilizers
1677. Husband having suspicion that his wife
      is having affair with another man,
      diagnosis is ?
 a) Illusion

 b) Delusion

 c) Hallucination

 d) Delirium



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Delusion
A delusion is false, firm (unshakeable) beliefthat is not accepted by
other members of patient's culture and society.
Above is an example of delusion of infedility (morbid jealousy,
othello syndrome) i.e-. False belief that one’s lover has been
unfaithful.
1678. A 25 year old male believes that his
      penis is decreasing in size everyday
      and one day it will disappear one day
      and he will die. Diagnosis is ?
 a) Obsession

 b) Somatization

 c) Hypochondriasis

 d) Delusion disorder



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Delusion disorder
Description given in the question is of Koro syndrome, a delusional
disorder.
Koro syndrome
Koro is a culture-specific syndrome delusional disorder in which an
individual has an overpowering belief that one’s genitalia are
retracting and will disappear, despite the lack of any true
longstanding changes to the genitals.
Koro is also known as shrinking penis. The syndrome is commonly
known as genital retraction syndrome.
  1679. Most common substance of abuse in
        India ?
   a) Cannabis

   b) Tobacco

   c) Alcohol

   d) Opium



   Correct Answer - B
   Ans.B. Tobacco
   National Household Survey of Drug and Alcohol Abuse in India
   – Estimated users: (2001)
1. Tobacco - 162 million.
2. Alcohol - 62 million
3. Cannabis - 9 million.
4. Opiates - 2.5 lakh
1680. In Neuroleptic malignant syndrome,
      cause of death is ?
 a) Respiratory failure

 b) Liver failure

 c) Drug toxicity

 d) None of the above



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Respiratory failure
Causes of death in NMS
Respiratory failure
Renal failure
Pneumonia
Thromboembolism
Cardiac failure
1681. The site of lesion in Korsakoff's
      psychosis is
 a) Frontal lobe

 b) Corpus striatum

 c) Mammilary Body

 d) Cingulate gyrus



Correct Answer - C
C i.e. Mammilary body
1682. Sex reassignment surgery is done in ?
 a) Gender identity disorder

 b) Premature ejaculation

 c) Erectile dysfunction

 d) Orgasmic dysfunction



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Gender identity disorder
Many persons with gender identity disorder have sought sex-
reassignment surgery, that is, physical change that is constant with
their cross sexual identity.
1683. All are reversible causes of dementia
      except
 a) Hypothyroidism

 b) Hydrocephalus

 c) Meningoencephalitis

 d) Alzheimer's disease



Correct Answer - D
Ans. 'D' i.e., Alzheimer's disease
Reversible causes of dementia
1)    Surgically treatable:- Normal pressure hydrocephalus, brain
tumors (frontal lobe tumor), meningioma, subdural hematoma due to
head injury, hydrocephalus.
2) Medically treatable:- Depression, hypothyroidism, alcohol
abuse, vitamin B 12/folate/Niacin deficiency, any metabolic or
endocrine disturbance, neurosyphilis, Hashimoto's encephalopathy,
Wilson's disease, celiac disease, Whipple's disease, chronic
meningoencephalitis, drugs and toxin (toxic dementia).
Irreversible causes of dementia:-
Alzheimer's disease, vascular (multi-infarct) dementia,
Parkinsonism, Huntington's chorea, Lewy body dementia, Pick's
disease.
1684. Which of the following is not associated
      with dementia:
      March 2011
a) Forgetfulness

b) Alteration of consciousness

c) Reduced personal care

d) Loss of neurons in brain



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B: Alteration of consciousness
There is impairment of judgement and impulse control, and
also impairment of abstract thinking There is however usually
no impairment of consciousness in dementia (unlike in
delirium) Dementia:
Chronic onset
No disturbance of consciousness
Cognitive impairment
Personality alteration
Impaired memory
Impaired judgment
Absent diurnal variation
1685. A girl with bad behavior like smashing
      and throwing objects was admitted in
      the hospital. There also she was
      behaving very badly with staff &
      abusing nurses. But she behaves very
      well with a one very good looking
      resident doctor. Diagnosis is?
 a) Bipolar disorder

 b) Schizoaffective disorder

 c) Borderline personality disorder

 d) Antisocial personality



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Antisocial personality
Antisocial (Dissocial) personality disorder
The essential features of antisocial personality disorder are a
disregard for and violation of the rights of the other and the ruIes of
the society.
It is characterized by repeated violation of the law and rules of the
society (drug abuse); physical aggressiveness; Reckless disregard
for safety of self or others; consistent irresponsibility in work and
family environment and lack of remorse.
This disorder is synonymous with previously used terms like
psychopath or sociopath.
1686. Trichophagia is characterized by?
 a) Compulsive pulling of hair

 b) Compulsive eating of hair

 c) Compulsive shopping

 d) Compulsive stealing



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Compulsive eating of hair
Trichophagia is compulsive eating of hair and is usually associated
with trichotillomania i.e. compulsive pulling of hair.
1687. All of the following are essential
      features of attention deficit hyperactive
      disease (ADHD) except -
 a) Lack of concentration

 b) Impulsivity

 c) Mental retardation

 d) Hyperactivity



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Mental Retardation
Inattentive

This must include at least 6 of the following symptoms of inattention
that must have persisted for at least 6 months to a degree that is
maladaptive and inconsistent with developmental level:
Often fails to give close attention to details or makes careless
mistakes in schoolwork, work, or other activities
Often has difficulty sustaining attention in tasks or play activities
Often does not seem to listen to what is being said
Often does not follow through on instructions and fails to finish
schoolwork, chores, or duties in the workplace (not due to
oppositional behavior or failure to understand instructions)
Often has difficulties organizing tasks and activities
Often avoids or strongly dislikes tasks (such as schoolwork or
homework) that require sustained mental effort
Often loses things necessary for tasks or activities (school
assignments, pencils, books, tools, or toys)
Often is easily distracted by extraneous stimuli
Often forgetful in daily activities
Hyperactivity/impulsivity
This must include at least 6 of the following symptoms of
hyperactivity-impulsivity that must have persisted for at least 6
months to a degree that is maladaptive and inconsistent with
developmental level:
Fidgeting with or tapping hands or feet, squirming in seat
Leaving seat in classroom or in other situations in which remaining
seated is expected
Running about or climbing excessively in situations where this
behavior is inappropriate (in adolescents or adults, this may be
limited to subjective feelings of restlessness)
Difficulty playing or engaging in leisure activities quietly
Unable to be or uncomfortable being still for extended periods of
time (may be experienced by others as “on the go” or difficult to
keep up with)
Excessive talking
Blurting out answers to questions before the questions have been
completed
Difficulty waiting in lines or awaiting turn in games or group
situations
Interrupting or intruding on others (for adolescents and adults, may
intrude into or take over what others are doing)
Other
Onset is no later than age 12 years
Symptoms must be present in 2 or more situations, such as school,
work, or home
The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment
in social, academic, or occupational functioning
Disorder does not occur exclusively during the course of
schizophrenia or other psychotic disorder and is not better
accounted for by mood, anxiety, dissociative, personality disorder or
substance intoxication or withdrawal
1688. MC cause of delirium ?
 a) Infection

 b) Liver failure

 c) Belladonna poisoning

 d) None of the above



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Infection
Infection is one of the most common causes of delirium.
   1689. Capgras syndrome is ?
    a) Sharing of delusion

    b) Delusion of double

    c) Erotomania

    d) Hypochondriacal delusions



   Correct Answer - B
   Ans. is 'B' i.e., Delusion of double
   Capgras syndrome is a delusion of double.
   The delusional misidentification syndrome (DSM)
   DSM is characterized by misidentification delusions of others or self.
   Four main syndromes are differentiated : ?
1. Capgras syndrome (Delusion of double):- Patient falsely sees a
   familiar person as a complete stranger who is imposing on him as a
   familiar person.
2. Fregoli syndrome (illusion de fregola): - The patient falsely identifies
   stranger as a familiar person.
3. Syndrome of subjective double: - The patient's own self is perceived
   as being replaced by a double.
4. Syndrome of intermetamorphosis: - A false belief that a person can
   transform into another person.
   These syndromes most commonly appear in schizophrenia. Other
   causes are Alzheimer syndrome, head injuries, and delusional
   disorders.
1690. Jamais vu is -
 a) Illusion that what one is hearing, one has heard previously

 b) A unfamiliar thought regarded as repetition of a previous
    thought

 c) Unfamiliar situations or events feel strangely familiar

 d) Feeling of strangeness to familiar situation



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Feeling of strangeness to familiar situation
famais vu :- A feeling of strangeness to familiar situations or events.
1691. Features like increased psychomotor
      acitivity, waxy flexinbility at time are
      seen classically in :
 a) Simple schizophrenia

 b) Hebephrenic schizophrenia

 c) Catatonic schizophrenia

 d) None of the above



Correct Answer - C
C. i.e. Catatonic schizophrenia
   1692. Characteristic hallucination of
         schizophrenia is
    a) Auditory hallucinations commanding the patient

    b) Auditory hallucinations giving running commentary

    c) Auditory hallucinations criticizing the patient

    d) Auditory hallucinations talking to patient



   Correct Answer - B
   Ans. B. Auditory hallucinations giving running commentary
   Third-person hallucinations, e.g. voices heard arguing, commenting
   or discussing the patient or giving a running commentary on one's
   action; are characteristic of schizophrenia.
   In schizophrenia auditory hallucinations are the most common
   type of hallucinations.
1. First-person hallucination:- Audible self-thoughts
2. Second person hallucination:- Voices address the person directly or
   commanding one's action and
3. Third-person hallucinations:- voices heard arguing, commenting or
   discussing the patient or giving a running commentary on his action
   or thought. Only the "third person hallucinations' are characteristic of
   schizophrenia.
1693. Good prognostic factor for
      schizophrenia is ?
 a) Blunted affect

 b) Early onset

 c) Presence of depression

 d) Male sex



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Presence of depression
Good prognostic factors :- Acute onset; late onset (onset after 35
years of age); Presence of precipitating stressor; Good premorbid
adjustment; catatonic (best prognosis) & Paranoid (2nd best); short
duration (< 6 months); Married; Positive symptoms; Presence of
depression; family history of mood disorder; first episode; pyknic
(fat) physique; female sex; good treatment compliance & good
response to treatment; good social support; presence of confusion
or perplexity; normal brain CT Scan; outpatient treatment.
1694. Self mutilation is a feature of ?
 a) Von-Gogh syndrome

 b) Catatonic schizophrenia

 c) Paranoid schizophrenia

 d) None of the above



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Von-Gogh syndrome
Dramatic self-mutilation occurring in schizophrenia has also been
called Von-Gogh syndrome'
1695. A patient inventing new words, is a
      feature of ?
 a) Neurosis

 b) Schizophrenia

 c) OCD

 d) Von-Gogh syndrome



Correct Answer - B
Ans B. Schizophrenia
Neologism: - New words or condensations of several words that are
not readily understood by others.
Neologism is seen in schizophrenia and organic brain syndrome.
1696. Increased dopamine levels are
      associated ?
 a) Depression

 b) Mania

 c) Delirium

 d) Schizophrenia



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Schizophrenia
Dopamine hypothesis is the most accepted hypothesis for
schizophrenia.
There is hyperactivity of dopaminergic system.
Other neurotransmitters involved are : - Increased serotonin,
Decreased GABA, variable change (Increased or decreased)
glutamate, and increased norepinephrine.
1697. Loosening of association is an example
      of
 a) Formal thought disorder

 b) Schneider's first symptoms

 c) Perseveration

 d) Concrete thinking



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Formal thought disorder
Thought disorders
Formal thought
                            Disorders of thought
disorders (Disorders of
                            process
thought process)
Racing thoughts :-
Anxiety, Schizophrenia
Retarded thoughts :-
Depression
                            Delusion :- Psychosis
Circumstantiality :-
                            (Schizophrenia mania,
Mania, Schizophrenia
                            depression & others
Thought
                            Obsession
blocking :-
                            Compulsion
Schizophrenia, Severe
                            Preoccupations
anxiety
                            Phobias
Perseveration :- Organic
                            Depersonalization &
brain disease,
                            Derealization
Schizophrenia
(occasionally
Loosening of
association :-
association :-
Schizophrenia
 Flight of ideas :- Mania
Tangentiality
Clunging & punning :-
Mania & schizophrenia
Neologism, word salad,
Echolalia :-
Schizophrenia
In schizophrenia and mood disorders (depression, mania) all parts of
the thought (thought process as well as content) are involved.
However, schizophrenia is conventionally referred as formal thought
disorder.
1698. Visual hallucinations is seen in :
 a) Alcoholism

 b) Mania

 c) Depression

 d) Phobia



Correct Answer - A
A. i.e. Alcololism
1699.      Treatment of choice for acute panic
                      attacks is ?
 a) Barbiturates

 b) Benzodiazepines

 c) TCAs

 d) MAO inhibitors



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Benzodiazepines
DOC for Panic disorders - SSRI’s
DOC for acute panic attack - Benzodiazepines.
1700. Which of the following is not true about
      sleep ?
 a) REM sleep comes earlier than NREM sleep

 b) REM sleep is also called paradoxical sleep

 c) Sleep walking comes in NREM sleep

 d) Dreams come in REM sleep



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. REM sleep comes earlier than NREM sleep
The NREM (with its four stages) and REM sleep repeat several
times a night in cyclic manner, 4-6 times depending on the length of
sleep.
A typical cycle starts with stage I of the NREM sleep which is
followed by second, third and fourth stages.
REM sleep occupies 20-30% of total sleep and NREM sleep
occupies 60-70% (Stage I occupies 5- 10%; Stage 2 occupies 40-
50% ;Stage 3 occupies 15-20%
1701. Gamma waves of REM sleep in sleep
      cycle are associated with ?
 a) Intense attention

 b) Subconscious thinking

 c) Deep subconscious thinking

 d) Deep sleep



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Intense attention
Beta and gamma waves (20-80Hz) occur spontaneously during
REM sleep and waking and are evoked by intense attention,
conditioned responses, tasks requiring fine movements and sensory
stimulus
1702. Behavioral therapy is done in ?
 a) Schizophrenia

 b) Agoraphobia

 c) Delirium

 d) Neurotic depression



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Agoraphobia
Most important use of behavioral therapy - Phobia & OCD.
Other users are - Other anxiety disorders (including panic), Eating
disorders, Autism, ADHD, some personality disorder, sexual
dysfunctions, depression.
1703. Not seen in anorexia nervosa:
      September 2009
 a) Osteoporosis

 b) Refusal to feeds

 c) Weight loss

 d) Menorrhagia



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D: Menorrhagia
Physical Signs of anorexia nervosa
* Excessive weight loss
* Scanty or absent menstrual periods
* Thinning hair
- Dry skin
* Cold ors wollen hands and feet
Bloated or upset stomach
* Downy hair covering the body Low blood pressure
* Fatigue
* Abnormal heart rhythms
*Osteoporosis
Psychological and Behavioral Signs in anorexia nervosa
* Distorted perception of self (insisting they are overweight when
they are thin)
* Being preoccupied with food Refusing to eat
* Inability to remember things
* Refusing to acknowledge the seriousness of the illness
Obsessive-compulsive behavior
* Depression
1704. Main difference between anorexia
      nervosa and bulimia nervosa lies
      in:
      March 2013
 a) Symptomatology

 b) Weight

 c) Gender

 d) Age



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B i.e. Weight
Anorexia nervosa and bulimia
Both anorexia nervosa and bulimia are characterized by an
overvalued drive for thinness and a disturbance in eating behavior.
The main difference between diagnoses is that anorexia nervosa is
a syndrome of self-starvation involving significant weight loss of 15
percent or more of ideal body weight, whereas patients with bulimia
nervosa are, by definition, at normal weight or above.
Bulimia is characterized by a cycle of dieting, binge-eating and
compensatory purging behavior to prevent weight gain.
Purging behavior includes vomiting, diuretic or laxative abuse.
Excessive exercise aimed at weight loss or at preventing weight gain
is common in both anorexia nervosa and in bulimia.
1705. Eating disorder with normal weight is?
 a) Anorexia nervosa

 b) Bulimia nervosa

 c) Binge eating disorder

 d) None of the above



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Bulimia nervosa
Anorexia nervosa - Under weight
Bulimia nervosa - Normal Weight
Binge eating disorder - Over weight.
1706. Binge eating disorder is characterized
      by ?
 a) Normal weight

 b) Weight loss

 c) Obesity

 d) Self induced vomiting



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Obesity
Binge eating disorder (BED) is characterized by insatiable cravings
that can occur any time day or night, usually secretive, and filled with
shame.
There are no comPensatory mechanisms associated with the binge
to get rid of calories, so individulas with BED are more likely to be
overweight or obese, while patients with bulimia nervosa may be
underweight, normal weight.
1707. Tricyclic antidepressants have all of the
      following actions except ?
 a) Anticholinergic action

 b) MAO inhibition

 c) Block 5-HT or NE reuptake

 d) Causes sedation



Correct Answer - B
Ans- B. MAO inhibition
Tricyclic antidepressants (TCAS) are either NA + 5HT reuptake
inhibitors (e.g. - Imipramine,
Amitriptyline) or predominantly NA reuptake inhibitors (e.g.
Desipramine, nortriptyline).
TCAs are not MAO inhibitors.
Adverse effects of TCFs are : anticholinergic side effects, sedatior,
mental confusion, weakness, increase appetite & weight gain,
sweating & fine tremor, postural hypotension and cardiac
arrhythmia.
1708. Which of the following is a feature of
      opioid withdrawal?
a) Tremors

b) Goose flesh

c) Dry nose and mouth

d) Constipation



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Goose flesh
Manifestations of morphine withdrawal -
Lacrimation
Sweating
Yawning
Gooseflash(Piloerection)
Mydriasis
Anxiety & fear
Restlessness
Insomnia
Abdominal colic
Diarrhea
Dehydration
Hypertension
Palpitation
Rapid weight loss
1709. Phototherapy is used in the treatment
      of ?
 a) Anorexia nervosa

 b) Seasonal affective disorder

 c) Schizophrenia

 d) Obsessive compulsive disorder



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Seasonal affective disorder
Phototherapy is primarily indicated in the treatment of seasonal
depressions.
In addition to seasonal depression, the other major indication for
phototherapy may be in sleep disorders.
   1710. Feature associated with mania is ?
    a) Neologism

    b) Perseveration

    c) Echolalia

    d) Flights of ideas



   Correct Answer - D
   Ans. D. Flights of ideas
   Diagnostic criteria for mania
   Three or more of the following for at least 1 week:-
1. Inflated selfvesteem or grandiosity
2. Decreased need for sleep
3. Overtalkativeness
4. Flightofvideas
5. Distractibility
6. Psychomotor agitation or Increased goal directed activities
7. Excessive involvement in pleasurable activities
  1711. Drug not used in prophylaxis of MD P ?
    a) Haloperidol

    b) Lithium

    c) Carbamazepine

    d) Valproate



   Correct Answer - A
   Ans. A. Haloperidol
   Prophylactic treatment for bipolar disorder:
1. Lithium (drugof choice)
2. Carbamazepine
3. Valproate
4. Other drugs which can be used are topiramate, Lamotrigine, atypical
   antipsychotics (artpiprazale, olanzapine,quetiapine, risperidone,
   Clozapine) and Gabapentin.
1712. Characterized by chronic, multiple tics
      ?
 a) Parkinson's disease

 b) Wilson's disease

 c) Shy-Drager syndrome

 d) Tourette's syndrome



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Tourette's syndrome
Tourette syndrome (also called Tourette's syndrome, Tourette's
disorder, Gilles de la Tourette syndrome, GTS or, more commonly,
simply Tourette's or TS) is an inherited neuropsychiatric disorder
with onset in childhood, characterized by multiple physical (motor)
tics and at least one vocal (phonic) tic.
1713. Tourette syndrome is a type of ?
 a) Tic disorder

 b) Mental retardation disorder

 c) Seizure disorder

 d) None of the above



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Tic disorder
Tourette syndrome (also called Tourette's syndrome, Tourette's
disorder, Gilles de la Tourette syndrome, GTS or, more commonly,
simply Tourette's or TS) is an inherited neuropsychiatric disorder
with onset in childhood, characterized by multiple physical (motor)
tics and at least one vocal (phonic) tic.
Average onset between the ages of 3 and 9 years.
Males are affected about three to four times more often than
females.
Common associations are ADHD and OCD.
1714. True about flumazenil is ?
 a) Can be used in barbiturate poisoning

 b) Specific antidote for opiate overdose

 c) Can be used in benzodiazepine overdose

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Can be used in benzodiazepine overdose
Fumazenil is an imidazobenzodiazepine derivative and a potent
benzodiazepine recePtor antagonist that competitively inhibits the
activity at the benzodiazepine recognition site on the GABA
benzodiazepine receptor complex thereby reversing the effects of
benzodiazepine on the central nervous system.
Flumazenil does not antagonize the central nervous system effects
of drugs affecting GABA-ergic neurons by means other than the
benzodiazepine receptor (including ethanol, barbiturates, or general
anesthetics) and does not reverse the effects of opioids.
1715. Which of the following typical
      antipsychotic drug is not available in
      depot form ?
 a) Haloperidol

 b) Risperidone

 c) Olanzapine

 d) Chlorpromazine



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Chlorpromazine
Antipsychotic drugs with depot preparations are risperidone,
poliperidone, halopetidol, fluphenazine, flupenthixol, zuclopenthixol,
olannpine, clozapine, imipramine and quetiapine.
1716. Conventional drug used in the
      treatment of delirium is?
 a) Haloperidol

 b) Lithium

 c) SSRIs

 d) Morphine



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Haloperidol
Drugs used for delirium:
Typical antipsychotics: - Haloperidol (Doc), Thioridazine,
chlorpromazine.
Atypical antipsychotics: - Risperidone, quetiapine, olanzapine.
Benzndiazepines (for delirium tremens): - Chlordiazepoxide,
Diazepam, Lorazepam, Clonazepam.
1717. General paralysis of insane is
      associated with ?
 a) Neurosyphillis

 b) Alzheimer's disease

 c) Parkinson's disease

 d) None of the above



Correct Answer - A
Ans, A. Neurosyphillis
General paresis, also known as general paralysis ofthe insane or
paralytic dementia, is a severe neuropsychiatric disorder, classified
as an organic mental disorder and caused by the chronic
meningoencephalitis that leads to cerebral atrophy in late-
stagesyphilis.
Degenerative changes are associated primarily with the frontal and
temporal lobar cortex-
General paralysis of the Insane (GPI) is progressive deterioration of
the whole mental and physical personality.
Symptoms included exaggeratedkneejerk, Iack ofreaction ofthe
pupils to light, an inabilityto pay attention, a'clouding'of
consciousness, poor short-term memory, tremulous voice, reflex
disturbances, and retinal anomalies' and diminished skin sensation.
Patients were often recognizable by their striking 'delusions of
grandeur”
1718. Sign of oppositionalism in a young
      child is due to?
 a) Mental retardation

 b) Organic mental disorder

 c) Mental distress

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Mental distress
“Oppositionalism, temper tantrums and breath holding spells are not
unusual during 1st years of life and are age typical expression of
frustration and anger”
1719. All of the following are associated
      increased REM latency, except ?
a) First night effect

b) SSRIs

c) Narcolepsy

d) Restless leg syndrome



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Narcolepsy
Increased REM latency -
PTSD
Restless leg syndrome.
First night effect
SSRI’s
TCA’s
Ethanol
Lithium
1720. Modafinil is used for the treatment of ?
 a) Narcolepsy

 b) Sexual dysfunction

 c) Depression

 d) Anxiety



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Narcolepsy
Modafinil is a wakefulness-promoting agent (or eugeroic) used for
treatment of disorders such as narcolepsy,shift work sleep disorder,
and excessive daytime sleepiness associated with obstructive sleep
apnea'
  1721. Drug with no mood stabilizing property
        is -
   a) Lithium

   b) Lamotrigine

   c) Imipramine

   d) Carbamazepine



   Correct Answer - C
   Ans. C. Imipramine
   The 5 individual drugs that can be used as mood stabilizers
   are:
1. Lithium
2. CarbamazePine
3. Lamotrigine
4. Valproate
5. Asenapine
1722. Haloperidol induced extarpyramidal
      side effects are treated by ?
 a) Benzodiazepines

 b) Barbiturates

 c) Anticholinergic drugs

 d) SSRIs



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Anticholinergic drugs
Commonly used medications for extra-pyramidal symptoms are
anticholinergic agents such as Benztropine, Diphenhydramine and
trihexyphenidyl.
Another common course of treatment includes dopamine agonist
agents such as pramipexole.
1723. Most common complication of modified
      ECT
 a) Intracerebellar Bleed

 b) Fracture spine

 c) Body ache

 d) Amnesia



Correct Answer - D
D i.e. Amnesia
* Electro convulsive therapy (seizure) increases production of brain
derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF)Q. Madsen proposed generation
of new neurons in the hippocampus may be an important
neurobiological element underlying the clinical effects of ECT.
* ECT is most commonly indicated (-85% of all ECT) and most
effective in treatment of major depression (with psychosis /
delusions /or suicidal tendency)Q. ECT is indicated in psychotic
(delusional) depressionQ because nihilistic delusions may induce
suicidal tendency, whereas ECT is not indicated in neurotic
depression (dysthynia), cyclothymiaQ. ECT may be useful in MDP
(bipolar) in decreasing duration of depressive episode.
ECT is not (or less) useful in chronic conditions like chronic
schizophrenia (with negativ symptoms esp)Q. Use of ECT is not the
first line (choice) of treatment in mania & schizophrenia (lithium &
anti psychotics are mainstay of treatment). Panic disorder is also
treated with drugs not ECT.
                             Indications of ECT
* ECT is most useful in acute and positive symptoms (eg suicidal
tendency, catatonia), whereas it is least effective in chronic
conditions and negative symptoms
* Clinical indications of ECT include
         Primary use        Secondary use
1. Rapid definitive 1. Failure to
response              respond or
required on medical
                      intolerance to
or
                      pharmacotherapy in
psychiatric grounds
                      current
2. Risk of
                      episode i.e. drugs
alternative
                      are
treatments out
                      ineffective,
weight benefits
                      contraindicated or
3. Past history of    have serious side
poor response to      effects
    psychotropics or 2. Rapid definitive
   good response to response
                      necessitated by
ECT
                      deterioration of
4. Patient            the patients
preferance            condition.

* ECT should be considered when the onset of disorder is acute,
when changes in mood, thought, and motor activities are
pronounced, when the cause of disorder is believed to be
biochemical or physiological, when the condition interferes with the
daily life or when other treatments have failed. Diagnosis for which
ECT may be indicated include (especially when a/w delusions).
Major (Severe)       Mania       Schizophrenia        Other
Depression with (Bipolar             (Severe        conditions
1. Psychosis (i.e.        disorder)     Psychosis) 1. Delirium d/t
delusional or       1.Psychosis     1. Catatonia             general
medical
psychotic            2. Manic          particularlyQ       conditions or
depression)Q, who delirium          2. Schizoaffective      substance
are guilt ridden or 3.Rapid cycling disorder (i.e.     intoxication
   feel worthless, who states           depressive      2. Catatonia d/t
   believe others 4. Acute             features)Q and    GMC, neurolept
   control their lives & uncontrolled schizophreniform
   malignantContraindications
   I. Absolute (relatively) Raised Intra Cranial TensionQ d/t fear of brain
   herniation.
1. Relative
   * Cerebro vascular Accident (CVA) = intracerebral hemorrhage
   * Recent Myocardial infarction (MI)
   * Severe hypertension
   * Pheochromocytoma - Severe Pulmonary disease
   * Retinal detachment - Space occupying intracerebral lesions
   (except for small, slow growing tumors without edema or other mass
   effect)
   * Unstable vascular aneurysms or malformations Complications
   Direct (Modified) ECT (when ECT is given without muscle relaxant &
   anesthesia)
   Most common side effect is fracture T4 T8 spineQ
   Causes decreased intraocular tension (JOT)
   . Modified ECT (with MR & anesthesia) Both retrograde & antegrade
   amnesia is found but the most common complication is retrograde
   amnesiaQ Antegrade amnesia usually resolves within 5 hours
   whereas retrograde memory deficits may take 6-9 monthsQ
1724. Causes of neuroregression in a child
      can be all except ?
 a) Wilson's disease

 b) Vitamin B12 deficiency

 c) ADHD

 d) Ataxia telengiectasia



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. ADHD
Causes of neuroregression
Inherited
A. GreY matter involvement-
With visceromegaly :- Niemann pick disease, Sandholf disease
(GM2), sialidosis, Goucherdisease, Mucopolyschharidoses (MPS)
Without visceromegaly :- TaySach Disease, Rett syndrome, Menke’s
kinky hair disease
B. White matter involvement:-
Leukodystrophies :- Metachromatic leukodystrophy, Krebbe's
disease, Adrenoleukodytrophy, Alexander disease, Cannavan
disease .
Acquired/Demyelinating:-
Multiplesclerosis,schilder'sdisease,Devicdisease
C. Basal ganglia involvement - Wilson’s disease, Dystonia muscular
deformans, Huntington's disease
D. Spinocerebeller :- Friedrich's ataxia, Ataxia telengiectasis
E. Acquired
Infections:- SSPE, progressive rubella syndrome, HIV
Metabolic:Chronicleadpoisoning,Hypothyoidism,VitB12&Edeficienry,Drugs(anticonv
1725. Mechanism of action of duloxetine is ?
 a) Selective Inhibition of serotonin reuptake

 b) Selective inhibition of nor-epinephrine reuptake

 c) Selective inhibition of both serotonin and nor-epinephrine
    reuptake

 d) None of the above



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Selective inhibition of both serotonin and nor-
epinephrine reuptake
Duloxetine, is a drug classified under serotonin-norepinephrine
reuptake inhibitors (sNRJs).
At lower doses it is more prominent serotonin reuptake inhibitor.
Whereas at higher doses it is more prominent inhibitor of nor-
epinephrine reuptake.
It has minimal dopamine agonist action.
1726. Which of the following describes the
      points marked in the diagram?




 a) Oblique conjugate

 b) Diagonal conjugate

 c) Obstetric conjugate

 d) True conjugate



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Diagonal conjugate
Diagonal conjugate : Distance between the lower border of pubic
symphysis to the midpoint on the sacral promontory. It measures 12
cm.


invalid question id
