1. Zygote with zona pellucida reaches uterine
   cavity by :
 a) 2 days

 b) 4 days

 c) 5 days

 d) 6 days



Correct Answer - B
4 days
2. In spermatogenesis, independent
   assortment of paternal and maternal
   chromosomes occurs during-
 a) Primary to secondary spermatocyte

 b) Spermatogonia to primary spermatocyte

 c) Secondary spermatocyte to spermatids

 d) Spermatids to spermatozoa



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Primary to secondary spermatocyte
In spermatogenesis, independent assortment of paternal and
maternal chromosomes occurs during meiosis I, in which primary
spematocyte) to (2n) is converted into two secondary spermatocytes
(In).
3. Tongue muscles are derived from
 a) Lateral plate mesoderm

 b) Occipital myotome

 c) Intermediate mesoderm

 d) Cervical myotome



Correct Answer - B
Ans: B Occipital myotome
Development of the tongue:-
I. Epithelium:
Ant 2/3 -- lingual swellings of 1st arch and tuberculum impar.
Post 1/3 -- large dorsal part of hypobranchial eminence, i.e, 3rd
arch.
Posterior most part -- small dorsal part of the hypobranchial
eminence, i.e. 4th arch.
II. Muscles:
Derived from occipital myotomes except palatoglossus which
is derived from the 6th arch.
   4. Which of the following is remnant of distal
      umbilical artery?
    a) Ligamentum Teres

    b) Superior Vescical artery

    c) Medial umbilical Ligament

    d) Ligamentum arteriosum



   Correct Answer - C
   Ans.C. Medial umbilical Ligament
   Remnant of umbilical artery:-
1. Proximal part : Superior vesical artery
2. Distal part: Medial umbilical ligament
5. All are derived from neural crest except ?
 a) Adrenal medulla

 b) Pigment cell in skin

 c) Corneal stroma

 d) Retinal pigmented epithelium



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is `d' i.e., Retinal pigmented epithelium
Derivatives of neuroectoderm
1. From neural tube : CNS (brain, spinal cord), astrocytes,
oligodendrocytes, ependymal cells, retina, pineal gland,
neurohypophysis (posterior pituitary), all cranial and spinal motor
nerves.
2. From neural crest : Neural crest derivatives are :?
3. Neural derivatives
* Sensory neurons of 5th, 7th, 8th, 9th, 10th cranial nerve ganglia
(trigeminal, geniculate, sphenopalatine, submandibular, cochlear,
vestibular, otic and vagal parasympathetic ganglia).
* Sensory neurons of spinal dorsal root ganglia.
* Sympathetic chain ganglia and plexus (celiac/preaortic/renal
ganglia, enteric plexus in GIT, i.e. Auerbachs and Meissner's)
* Parasympathetic ganglia and plexus of GIT.
* Schwann cells of peripheral nerves, satellite cells of all ganglia.
* Adrenal medulla, chromaffin cells, para follicular C-cells of thyroid
gland.
* Melanocytes and melanoblasts.
6. Optic vesicle is derived from -
 a) Endoderm

 b) Mesoderm

 c) Neuroectoderm

 d) Surface Ectoderm



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Neuroectoderm
An outgrowth from prosencephalon forms optic vesicle
(neuroectodermal structure).
Proximal part of optic vesicle becomes constricted and elongated to
form optic stalk
Growing optic vesicle comes in contact with surface ectoderm which
is thickened to form lens placode.
7. Digeorge syndrome is characterized by all
   except ?
 a) Congenital thymic hypoplasia

 b) Abnormal development of third and fourth pouches

 c) Hypothyroidism

 d) Hypocalcemic tetany



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Hypothyroidism
8.
Part of neural tube from which corpus
callosum develops
 a) Basal lamina

 b) Alar lamina

 c) Lamina terminalis

 d) Basal plate



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Lamina terminalis
The development of the corpus callosum occurs between the
12th and 16-20th weeks of gestation 6.
It begins with the genu and then continues posteriorly along the
body to the splenium. The rostrum is the last part to be formed.
Myelination of the corpus callosum occurs in the opposite direction,
from the splenium forwards.
They develop from lamina terminalis which is cranial part of neural
tube and later lies in the anterior wall of 3'd ventricle.
The corpus callosum, the largest of cerebral commissures, takes the
form of an arch over the third ventricle.
It connects the neocortices of both sides.
9. Epithelial lining of urinary bladder ?
 a) Squamous

 b) Transitional

 c) Cuboidal

 d) Columnar



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Transitional
Urothelium (transitional epithelium) is found in renal pelvis, calyces,
ureter, urinary bladder, proximal part of urethra.
10. Female urethra develops from -
 a) Urogenital sinus

 b) Mesonephric duct

 c) Ureteric bud

 d) Metanephric Blastema



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Urogenital sinus
The female urethra is mainly derived from the urogenital sinus while
the urethral plate forms the vestibule and labia minora.
  11. All of the following help in formation of
      IVC except -
    a) The posterior intercardinal anastomosis

    b) Terminal portion of right vitelline vein

    c) Segment of right cardinal vein

    d) Subcardinal sinus



   Correct Answer - D
   Ans. D. Subcardinal sinus
   The inferior vena cava is composed of (from caudal to cranial):
1. Posterior intercardinal anastomosis.
2. The caudal portion of the right supracardinal vein.
3. The right anastomosis between the supracardinal and the
   subcardinal veins.
4. A segment of the right subcardinal vein.
5. The anastomosis between the right subcardinal and right vitelline
   veins.
6. The terminal portion of the right vitelline vein.
12. Kidney parenchyma is derived from -
 a) Ureteric bud

 b) Mesonephros

 c) Metanephros

 d) Paramesonephros



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Metanephros
Metanephros : This system will form the nephrons and parenchyma
of the definitive kidney.
13. Facial nerve is a derivative of which of the following branchial arch?
 a) First arch

 b) Second arch

 c) Third arch

 d) Fourth arch



Correct Answer - B
Facial nerve is a derivative of second branchial arch. Muscles of facial expression derived
from it are buccinator, auricularis, frontalis, platysma, orbicularis oris and orbicularis oculi.
Additional muscles supplied by it are stapedius, stylohyoid, and posterior belly of digastric.
 Branchial      Cranial nerve         Muscles
 arch

 First          Trigeminal            Muscles of mastication: masseter, temporalis, medial
 mandibular                           and lateral pterygoid. Additional muscles: mylohyoid,
                                      anterior belly of digastric, tensor tympani, tensor veli
                                      palatini

 Third          Glossopharyngeal      Stylopharyngeus

 Fourth and     Superior              Pharyngeal and laryngeal muscles: cricothyroid,
 sixth          laryngeal,            levator veli palatini, constrictors of pharynx, intrinsic
                recurrent             muscles of larynx
                laryngeal
                branches of
                vagus


Ref: Neuroscience for the Study of Communicative Disorders By Subhash Chandra
Bhatnagar page 279.
   14. Leptotene and pachytene are stages
       ofwhich phases of meiosis -
    a) Prophase I

    b) Metaphase I

    c) Anaphase II

    d) Telophase II



   Correct Answer - A
   Ans. A. Prophase I
   Meiosis 1 is divided into following phases :-
   l) Prophase 1: It is further divided into following stages:-
1. Leptotene
2. zygotene
3. Pachytene
4. Diplotene
5. Diakinais
   2) Metaphase 1
   3) Anaphase 1
   4) Telophase 1
15. Pelvic kidneys are due to all except ?
 a) Inability to ascend during fetal life

 b) Fusion of the lower poles

 c) Being blocked by branches of the aorta

 d) p53 mutation



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. p53 mutation
Pelvic kidney
A fetal pelvic kidney is a condition that results when the kidneys fail
to ascend to their normal position above the waist and remain in the
pelvis because they are blocked by blood vessels in the aorta.
Developing kidneys may also fuse together causing what is known
as a 'horseshoe kidney"
A fetal pelvic kidney or horseshoe kidney is generally diagnosed by
ultrasound (sonogram) examination before birth.
Evaluation of the kidneys is part of the routine ultrasound
examination done by many obstetricians as part of their prenatal
care around the 20s week of pregnancy.
16. Crypta magna develops from which
    pouch?
 a) 1st

 b) 2nd

 c) 3rd

 d) 4th



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. 2nd
Medial surface of each tonsil has 15-20 crypts, the largest of which
is called Intratonsillar cleft or crypto magna (which represents
persistence of the ventral portion of the second pharyngeal pouch).
17. Which of the following is a traction
    epiphysis?
a) Distal Radius

b) Mastoid process

c) Tibial Condyles

d) Coracoid Process



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Mastoid process
18. All of the following are true about the liver
    except ?
 a) It is covered by Glisson's capsule

 b) Stellate cells are present in the space of Disse

 c) Kupfer cells are the defense cells

 d) The lobules in the liver are pentagonal



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. The lobules in the liver are pentagonal
Liver has hexagonal lobules
19. Hering's canal is present in ?
 a) Spleen

 b) Liver

 c) Kidney

 d) Lung



Correct Answer - B
Ans, B. Liver
1he canal of Hering or intrahepatic bile ductules are part of outflow
system of exocrine bile product from the liver.
They are found between the bile canaliculi and interlobular bile ducts
near the outer edge ofliver lobule.
20. Herring's bodies are present in?
 a) Pars tuberalis

 b) Pars intermedia

 c) Neurohypophysis

 d) Pars terminal is



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Neurohypophysis
Herring bodies or neurosecretory bodies are structures found in the
posterior pituitary (neurohypophysis).
21. All of the following are true about thymus
    except?
 a) The cortical portion is mainly composed of lymphocytes

 b) The medulla contains Hassall's Corpuscles

 c) It is derived from the fourth Pharyngeal pouch

 d) It undergoes atrophy puberty onwards



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. It is derived from the fourth Pharyngeal pouch
The thymus is a specialized primary lymphoid organ of the immune
system. Within the thymus, T cells or T lymphocytes mature.
The thymus is largest and most active during the neonatal and pre-
adolescent periods. By the early teens, the thymus begins to atrophy
and thymic stroma is mostly replaced by adipose (fat) tissue
Thymus is derived from the third pharyngeal pouch
22. Auerbachs plexus is present in the -
 a) Colon

 b) Esophagus

 c) Stomach

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - D
All of the above
23. Which of the followinglayer is absent in
    the esophagusa -
 a) Adventitia

 b) Serosa

 c) Muscularis propria

 d) Mucosa



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Serosa
The esophagus also has an adventitia, but not a serosa
24. Which is the most abundant cartilage-
 a) Hyaline cartilage

 b) Elastic cartilage

 c) Fibrocartilage

 d) None



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Hyaline cartilage
  25. Haustrations are present in -
   a) Duodenum

   b) Ileum

   c) Jejunum

   d) Colon



   Correct Answer - D
   Ans. is 'd'i.e., Colon [Rel BDC #/e Vol.2 p. 2661
1. Characteristics features of large intestine (colon) are:-i)
   3longitudinal bands, formed by longitudinal muscle coat, called
   Taeniae coli.
2. Sacculation or haustration
3. Fat filled peritoneal pouches called appendices epiploicae.
   These are not found in appendix, caecum and rectum.
4. Greater part is fixed except for appendix, transverse colon and
   sigmoid colon.
5. Pyere's patches (present in small intestine) are not present.
26. What is the lining of the lacrimal gland
    alveoli?
 a) Ciliated columnar cells

 b) Pyramidal cells

 c) Non keratinizing squamous epithelium

 d) None



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Pyramidal cells
Alveoli of the gland are lined by pyramidal cells, which show lightly
stained apical secretary granules.
27. What type of muscles are medial two
    lumbricals?
 a) Unipennate

 b) Bipennate

 c) Multipennate

 d) None



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Bipennate
28. Ansa nephroni is lined by ?
 a) Columnar

 b) Squamous epithelium

 c) Cuboidal and columnar epithelium

 d) Stratified squamous epithelium



Correct Answer - B
B i.e. Squamous epithelium
29. Four carpal bones are present at what
    age?
 a) 3 years

 b) 4 years

 c) 5 years

 d) 6 years



Correct Answer - B
4 years REF: Parikh 6' edition page 2.9
Between 2 to 6 years, the number of carpal bones present on X ray
represents the approximate age in years, as for example, four carpal
bones — 4 years.
30. What is the level of the spine of scapula?
 a) T7

 b) T I 0

 c) T4

 d) T2



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. T4
Spine of scapula is at T3T4level
31. Which of the following muscles carries
    out shoulder abduction from 15 to 90
    degrees?
 a) Suprapinatus

 b) Trapezius

 c) Deltoid

 d) Serratus Anterior



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Deltoid
32. Which muscle acting on the thumb has
    dual nerve supply?
 a) Flexor Pollicis Longus

 b) Flexor Pollicis brevis

 c) Adductor Pollicis

 d) Opponens Pollicis



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Flexor Pollicis brevis
33. What is Wartenberg's sign?
 a) Inability to maintain Intrinsic plus position

 b) Inability to adduct small finger against the ring finger

 c) Inability to grasp a book between the thumb and index finger

 d) Inability to move the middle finger sideways



Correct Answer - B
Ans, B. Inability to adduct small finger against the ring finger
Wartenberg’s sign is inability to adduct the small finger in against the
ring fnger due to weakness of palmar interosseous muscles.
34. Sensory region of the ulnar nerve is?
 a) Tip of little finger

 b) Tip of index finger

 c) 1st web space

 d) Lateral upper aspect of arm



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Tip of little finger
35. Pulp of the index finger is supplied by
a) Median nerve

b) Radial nerve

c) Ulnar nerve

d) Axillary nerve



Correct Answer - A
Ans, A. Median nerve
   36. Low radial nerve [just after spiral groove]
       palsy does not produce ?
    a) Loss of wrist extention

    b) Loss of elbow extention

    c) Loss of finger extention

    d) Loss of thumb extention



   Correct Answer - B
   Ans. B. Loss of elbow extention
   Low radial nerve palsy
   Injury is after the spird groove.
   Low radial nerve palsy may be of two types :
   i) Type I: - Injury occurs between the spiral groove and elbow joint.
   Muscles involvement is : -
1. Elbow ertensors (Triceps, anconeus) are spared.
2. Wrist, elbow and finger extensors are paralysed.
3. Sensory loss in first web space (on dorsal side)
   Ii) Type II: - Injury occurs below the elbow joint.
1. Elbow extensors (triceps, anconeus) and wrist extensors (ECRL) are
   spared.
2. Finger extensors (extensor digitorum, extensor digiti minimi,
   extensor indicis) and thumb extensors (extensor pollicisc longus &
   brevis) are paralysed.
3. Sensory loss in first web space (on dorsal side).
   If lesion is low
   a) Type 1
   Wrist drop, thumb drop and finger drop.
   Elbow extension is preserved.
   Sensory loss over the dorsum of first web space.
b) Type 2
Thumb drop and finger drop
Elbow and wrist extension is preserved
Sensory loss over the dorsum of first web space
37. Infraspinous fossa of scapula contains
    which of the following muscles?
 a) Subscapularis

 b) Infraspinatus

 c) Teres major

 d) Supraspinatus



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Infraspinatus
Infraspinatus attaches medially to the infraspinous fossa of the
scapula and laterally to the middle facet of the greater tubercle of the
humerus.
38. Structure passing deep to flexor
    retinaculum at wrist:
 a) Ulnar nerve

 b) Median nerve

 c) Radial nerve

 d) Ulnar artery



Correct Answer - B
The flexor retinaculum stretches across the front of the wrist and
converts the concave anterior surface of the hand into an
osteofascial tunnel, the carpal tunnel, for the passage of:
The median nerve
Flexor tendons of the thumb (flexor pollicis longus ) and fingers
(flexor digitorum superficialis and profundus).
Radial and the ulnar bursa
It is attached medially to the pisiform bone and the hook of the
hamate and laterally to the tubercle of the scaphoid and the
trapezium bones.
The attachment to the trapezium consists of superficial and deep
parts and forms a synovial-lined tunnel for passage of the tendon of
the flexor carpi radialis.
The lower border is attached to the palmar aponeurosis.
39. Coracoacromial ligament resists which
    movements?
 a) Upward displacement of humeral head

 b) Abduction of shoulder

 c) Inferior displacement of humerus

 d) External rotation



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Upward displacement of humeral head
The coracoacromial ligament is a flat triangular band that plays a
supportive role for the shoulder joint.
Coracoacromial prevents Upward displacement of humeral head.
It has two part, conoid (medial) and trapezoid (lateral). The weight of
the upper limb is transmitted to the medial two-third of the clavicle
and thence to the axial skeleton through the coraco-clavicular
ligment.
40. Coracohumeral ligament inserts on?
 a) Greater tuberosity

 b) Lesser and greater tuberosities

 c) Anatomical neck of humerus

 d) Bicepetal groove



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Lesser and greater tuberosities
Coracohumeral ligament :
An extraarticular ligament on the lateral surface ofcoracoid and
inserts into the greater and lesser tuberosities, spanning the bicipital
groove.
Sectioning of coracohumeral ligaments produces anteroinferior
instability.
Represents folded thickening of glenohumeral capsule in area of
rotator interval between subscapularis & supraspinatus.
W/body upright & arm in dependent position, coracohumeral &
MGHL play important roles in resisting inf translation.
41. What is the action of anconeus?
 a) Primary elbow extensor

 b) Assists Extension of elbow

 c) Wrist extension

 d) Thumb Abduction



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Assists Extension of elbow
Anconeus = Its role in elbow extension is trivial in humans. It assists
in extension of the elbow, where the triceps brachii is the principal
agonist, and supports the elbow in full extension.
  42. Which muscle helps in climbing a tree ?
    a) Latissimus Dorsi

    b) Rhomboideus

    c) Trapezius

    d) Levator scapulae



   Correct Answer - A
   Ans. A. Latissimus Dorsi
   Climbing of tree is helped by:
1. Latissimus Dorsi
2. Pectoralis major
   Latissimus Dorsi is also known as "climber's muscle" or "Tree
   climbing muscle".
43. Posterior interosseus artery is a branch of
    ?
 a) Common interosseus artery

 b) Radial artery

 c) Median artery

 d) Brachial artery



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Common interosseus artery
The common interosseous artery, about 1 cm. in length, arises
immediately below the tuberosity of the radius from the ulnar artery.
44. Which muscle protects the brachial
    plexus in case of clavicle fractures?
 a) Subclavius

 b) Supraspinatus

 c) Subscapularius

 d) Teres Minor



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Subclavius
The subclavius protects the underlying brachial plexus and
subclavian vessels from a broken clavicle.
45. Which of the following is true about deep
    palmar arch?
 a) Mainly formed by the radial artery

 b) Ulnar artery has no contribution to it

 c) It gives off 5 perforating branches

 d) It does not anastomose with the superficial palmar arch



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Mainly formed by the radial artery
Deep palmar arch
It lies across the base of metacarpal bones. It is formed mainly by
radial artery and completed by a deep branch of the ulnar artery.
Its branches are:-
Three palmar metacarpal arteries
Three perforating arteries
Recurrent branches
The deep palmar arch lies deep to the oblique head of adductor
pollicis, long flexor tendon, and lumbrical muscles and passes
across the base of metacarpal and interossei.
46.
Which part of scapula can be palpated in the
infraclavicular fossa?
 a) Coracoid process

 b) Spine of scapula

 c) Inferior angle

 d) Supraspinous fossa



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Coracoid process
The coracoid process is a thick curved process attached by a broad
base to the upper part of the neck of the scapula; it runs at first
upward and medial ward; then, becoming smaller, it changes its
direction, and projects forward and lateralward.
It is palpable just below the clavicle.
47. Flexor carpi radialis inserts into ?
 a) Base of 5th metatarsal

 b) Base of 2nd and 3rd metacarpal

 c) Scaphoid and trapezium

 d) Capitate and hamate



Correct Answer - B
Ans., B. Base of 2nd and 3rd metacarpal
Flexor carpi radialis
Origin: Medial epicondyle of the humerus.
Insertion: Base of second and third metacarpals.
Nerve supply: Median nerve.
Action: Pronator of the forearm, weak flexor of elbow.
48. What is true about lateral tibial condyle ?
 a) Iliotibial tract is attached to the lateral condyle of tibia

 b) Ligamentum patellae inserts on it

 c) Medial collateral ligament is attached to it

 d) Semimembranosus is attached to it



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Iliotibial tract is attached to the lateral condyle of tibia
* Tibia is the second longest bone (after femur).
* Proximal end (upper end)
  - Proximal (upper) end of tibia includes medial and lateral condyles,
forming tibial plateau. It also includes tibial tuberosity and
intercondylar area (area between medial and lateral condyle).
  - Distal end
* Medial malleolus gives attachment to deltoid ligament (medial
collateral ligament) of ankle.
49. Weakness of extensor Hallucis longus is
    due to which nerve root mainly?
 a) L5

 b) L4

 c) S1

 d) S2



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. L5
50. Which of the following is common
    between the medial and lateral plantar
    arch?
 a) Flexor Digitorum Brevis

 b) Plantar Fascia

 c) Spring Ligamnet

 d) Deltoid Ligament



Correct Answer - B
Ans, B. Plantar Fascia
Plantar fascia acts as a tie beam for both medial and lateral plantar
arches.
51. Which tendon is lodged in the groove on
    posterior surface of lateral malleolus?
 a) Peroneus longus

 b) Tibialis anterior

 c) Tibialis posterior

 d) Flexor Hallucis Longus



Correct Answer - A
Ans, A. Peroneus longus
Peroneus longus ends in a long tendon, which runs behind thelateral
malleolus, in a groove common to it.
52. All of the following are true about tibialis
    anterior except ?
 a) It is supplied by the superficial peroneal nerve

 b) It dorsiflexes the foot

 c) It is closely related to the anterior tibial vessels

 d) It inserts on the medial cuneiform



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. It is supplied by the superficial peroneal nerve
Tibialis anterior
It is situated on the lateral side of the tibia; it is thick and fleshy
above, tendinous below.
The tibialis anterior overlaps the anterior tibial vessels and deep
peroneal nerve in the upper part of the leg.
53. Attachment on posterior surface of
    sacrum?
 a) Multifidus Lumborum

 b) Iliacus

 c) Coccygeus

 d) Piriformis



Correct Answer - A
Ans, A. Multifidus Lumborum
Attachements on sacrum
A) Posterior Surface
Multifidus lumborum –
The deepest muscle arising from the sacrum.
Some of its fibers cover the uPper two sacral foramina.
This muscle attaches to the transverse processes of the superior
vertebrae and is therefore able to help stabilize the spine.
Erector spinae –
Partly arises from the posterior sacrum and the sacrospinous
ligament.
It is essential in achieving extension and lateral bending of the head
and vertebral column
54. Structures passing through sacral hiatus
    are ?
 a) S4 nerve root

 b) S2 nerve root

 c) S3 nerve root

 d) S5 nerve root



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. S5 nerve root
Sacral hiatus
The sacral hiatus corresponds to the posterior caudal opening at the
end ofthe sacral canal, which usually occurs at the fifth sacral
vertebra (S5), at the posterior surface ofthe sacrum.
55. Longest cutaneous nerve in body ?
 a) Lateral cutaneous nerve of thigh

 b) Medial cutaneous nerve of thigh

 c) Saphenous nerve

 d) Sural nerve



Correct Answer - C
Ans, C. Saphenous nerve
The saphenous branch of the femoral nerve (saphenous nerve) is
the longest cutaneous nerve. It runs with the great saphenous vein
in front of medial malleolus and supplies the skin of anteromedial
aspect of the leg and medial border of the foot. The saphenous
nerve may be damaged in front of the medial malleolus during
venesection of the long saphenous vein.
Therefore, femoral nerve damage can cause sensory loss over the
area of the great saphenous vein in the leg.
56. Oblique popliteal ligament is derived from
    ?
 a) Semitendinosus

 b) Biceps femoris

 c) Adductor magnus

 d) Semimembranosus



Correct Answer - D
Ans, D. Semimembranosus
Oblique popliteal ligament
It is an expansion from the tendon of semimembranosus attachment
to intercondylar line of femur.
It is closely related to popliteal artery and is pierced by middle
genicular vessels and nerve and the terminal part of the posterior
division of the obturator nerve.
57. Lateral border of the foot receives its
    sensory supply from ?
a) Saphenous nerve

b) Sural nerve

c) Deep peroneal nerve

d) Sciatic nerve



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Sural nerve
58. All of the following is included in chest
    wall except?
a) Ribs

b) Thoracic Vertebrae

c) Sternum

d) Lumbar vertebrae



Correct Answer - D
Ans, D. Lumbar vertebrae
59. Respiratory bronchioles are formed from
    ?
 a) Principal bronchus

 b) Terminal bronchioles

 c) Tertiary Bronchus

 d) Lobar bronchioles



Correct Answer - B
Ans, B. Terminal bronchioles
Terminal bronchiole emnate into respiratory bronchioles.
Repiratory bronchioles proceed into the alveolar ducts, which
immediately branch into alveolar sacs (alveoli).
60. Segment of bronchi distal to primary
    bifurcation?
a) Primary bronchi

b) Terminal bronchiole

c) Respiratory bronchiole

d) Sencondary bronchi



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Primary bronchi
61. The cricopharyngeal sphincter is how far
    from the central incisor?
 a) 15cm

 b) 25cm

 c) 40cm

 d) 50cm



Correct Answer - A
Ans, A. 15cm
At the level of T1O vertebra, its passage through esophageal hiatus
of diaphram lower esophageal sphincter- 37.5-40 cm (f5-f6 inches)
from incisor
62. Which of the following structures is
    related to the esophagus 22.5cm from the
    incisor teeth?
 a) Arch of aorta

 b) Right principal broncus

 c) Thoracic Duct

 d) Azygous Vein



Correct Answer - A
Ans, A. Arch of aorta
2d constriction is at T4 level where arch of aorta crosses esophagus.
63. Thoracic duct opens into systemic
    circulation at?
 a) junction of SVC and left brachiocephalic vein

 b) Junction of left internal jugular and left subclavian vein

 c) Directly into coronary sinus

 d) Into azygous vein



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Junction of left internal jugular and left subclavian vein
Thoracic duct begins as a continuation of the upper end of the
cisternachy linear the lower border of T12 vertebra and enters the
thorax through the aortic opening of diaphragrn (at T12). It then
ascends through the posterior mediastinum and at T5 level crosses
from right side to the left side and ascends along left margin of
oesophagus to enter the neck. At the level of C7 vertebrae, arches
towards left side to open into left brachiocephalic vein at the angle of
union of left subclavian and left internal jugular veins.
64. Sympathetic supply of the heart is from ?
 a) Vagus

 b) Thoracic sympathetic fibres [T1 to T5]

 c) Lumbar sympathetic fibres

 d) Cervical ganglion



Correct Answer - B
Ans, B. Thoracic sympathetic fibres [T1 to T5]
65. Which of the following are cusps of the
    aortic valves?
 a) Left, right and Anterior

 b) Anterior, Right and Posterior

 c) Posterior, Left and Right

 d) Anterior, Posterior and Left



Correct Answer - C
Ans, C. Posterior, Left and Right
The aortic valve is a semilunar valve with three cusps which include
left, right and posterior.
66. Which is the widow's artery in myocardial
    infarction?
 a) Left anterior descending artery

 b) Right coronary artery

 c) Posterior interventricular artery

 d) Left circumflex artery



Correct Answer - A
Ans, A. Left anterior descending artery
The anterior interventricular branch of the left coronary artery, (also
left anterior descending artery (LAD), or anterior descending branch)
is a branch of the left coronary artery.
Occlusion of this artery is often called the widow-maker infarction
and hence this artery is called a widow’s artery.
67. Which of the following passes posterior to
    the hilum of the lung?
 a) Vagus

 b) Phrenic nerve

 c) SVC

 d) Right atrium



Correct Answer - A
Ans, A. Vagus
68. What is the level of the pulmonary valve?
 a) 3rd intercostal space

 b) 4th costal cartilage

 c) 3rd costal cartilage

 d) 2nd intercostal space



Correct Answer - C
Ans, C. 3rd costal cartilage
69. Lower limit of the inferior border of the
    lung in the midaxillary line is ?
 a) 6th rib

 b) 8th rib

 c) 10th rib

 d) 12th rib



Correct Answer - B
Ans, B. 8th rib
The lower limit of the inferior border of the lung is 2 ribs above the
reflection of the pleural.
In the midaxillary line the pleura reflects at the 10th rib and hence the
lower limit of the lung is 8th rib.
70. Which is a typical intercostal nerve?
 a) First

 b) Second

 c) Third

 d) Seventh



Correct Answer - C
Third
"Typical intercostal nerves are the ones that are confined to their
own intercostal spaces in the thoracic wall. The third, fourth, fifth and
sixth intercostal nerves are the typical nerves"
71. Great cardiac vein lies in ?
 a) Tricuspid valve

 b) Anterior interventricular sulcus

 c) Posterior interventricular sulcus

 d) None



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'B' i.e., Anterior interventricular sulcus [Ref BDC 4th/e
Vol. I, p. 251-252; Keith Moore Clinical Anatomy hlth/e p. 136-137;
Snell's Clinical Anatomy9th/e p. 121]
(Atrioventricular) sulcus → Great cardiac vein, coronary sinus,
Small cardiac vein, RCA, LCX.
Anterior interventricular sulcus → Great cardiac vein, left anterior
descending (interventricular) artery.
Posterior interventricular sulcus → Middle cardiac vein, Posterior
interventricular branch of RCA.
72. Apex at of the lung lies at what level?
 a) Above the clavicle

 b) Below the clavicle

 c) At the level of the clavicle

 d) None



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Above the clavicle [Ref BDC 4thie p. 222-228]
Apex lies in the inlet of thorax, 2-5 cm above the clavicle. It is
related anteriorly to subclavian artery and vein. Posteriorly it is
separated from neck of first rib by (from medial to lateral)
sympathetic trunk, fist posterior intercostal vein, superior intercostal
artery, and ascending branch of ventral ramus of 1" thoracic nerve.
73. Diaphragm is supplied by ?
 a) Phrenic nerve

 b) C2,C3,C4 Roots

 c) Thoracodorsal nerve

 d) Long thoracic nerve



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e.,Phrenic nerve [Ref BDC 6th/e Vol I p. 192, fig. 12.12]
Nerve supply
Motor :- Phrenic nerve (C3C4C5).
Sensory :- i) centrally by phrenic nerve.
Peripherally by lower 6 intercostal nerves.
   74. Midpoint between suprasternal notch and
       pubic symphyses passes through which
       plane?
    a) Transpyloric plane

    b) Transtubercular plane

    c) Trnasxiphoid plane

    d) None



   Correct Answer - A
   Ans. is 'a' i.e.,Transpyloric plane [Ref BDC Vol-2 6th/e p. 229]
   Anterior abdominal wall is divided into 9 regions with the help of two
   vertical and two horizontal planes.
   The horizontal planes include : -
1. Transpyloric plane (of Adison) :- It lies midway between the
   suprasternal notch and pubic symphysis. It
   passes                   anteriorly through tips of 9'h costal
   cartilage and posteriorly through lower border of L,
   vertebra. Organs present at this level are hilum of kidney, pylorus
   of stomach, beginning of duodenum, neck of pancreas, fundus of
   gall bladder and origin of SMA.
2. Transtubercular plane :- It connects the tubercles of iliac crests
   and pass through upper border of L5 vertebra.
   The two vertical planes are right and left lateral planes passing
   through midinguinal point (also called as midinguinal plane or
   midclavicular plane).
   The nine regions from above downwads are -
1. In middle :- Epigastrium, umblical, hypogastrium.
2. On right side :- Right hypochondrium, right lumbar, and right inguinal
   (iliac) regions.
3. Left side :- Left hypochordrium, left lumbar and left inguinal (iliac)
   regions.
75. Muscle lying between anterior and middle
    layer of thoracolumbar fascia is ?
 a) Psoas major

 b) Quadratus Lumborum

 c) Obdurator internus

 d) External oblique



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Quadratus Lumborum [Ref BDC 6th le Vol. 2 p.
343; Snell 9" /e p. 695]
Quadratus lomborum is enclosed between anterior and middle
layers. Erector spinae (paraspinal muscle) is enclosed
between middle and posterior layer.
76. Anterior Rectus Sheath just above pubic
    symphysis is formed by ?
 a) External Oblique Aponeurosis

 b) The aponeurosis of three muscles including External Oblique,
    Internal Oblique, and Transversus Abdominis

 c) Linea Alba

 d) Internal Oblique only



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'B' i.e., Aponeurosis of three muscles including External
Oblique, Internal Oblique, and Transversus Abdominis
The anterior wall just above the symphysis pubis (area below the
arcuate line) → is formed by aponeurosis of all three muscles
(external oblique, internal oblique, transversus abdominis).
Three aponeurotic layers forming rectus sheath of both sides
interlace with each other to form a tendinous raphe, Linea alba. It
extends from the xiphoid process to pubic symphysis.
Linea alba is narrow and indistinct below the umbilicus, as two recti
lie in close contact. Linea alba broadens out above the level of the
umbilicus.
77. Right suprarenal vein drains into ?
 a) Inferior vena cava

 b) Right renal vein

 c) Left renal vein

 d) Accessory Hemiazygous vein



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Inferior vena cava
Arterial supply of adrenal gland is by three arteries:-
1. Superior suprarenal artery (branch of the inferior phrenic artery);
2. Middle suprarenal artery (branch of abdominal aorta); and
3. inferior suprarenal artery (branch of the renal artery).
Venous drainage is through the suprarenal veins.
Right suprarenal (adrenal) vein drains into IVC and left suprarenal
vein drains into the left renal vein and then into IVC.
Lymphatics from suprarenal glands drain into lateral aortic (para-
aortic) nodes.
78. Which of the following is not derived from
    the external oblique aponeurosis?
 a) Inguinal Ligament

 b) Lacunar ligament

 c) Line Semilunaris

 d) Pectineal Ligament



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Line Semilunaris [Ref BDC 6th/e Vol 2 p. 343;
Snell 91Ve p. 695]
External oblique → Inguinal (Pouparts) ligament
Lacunar ligament Mnemonic : IPL
Pectineal (cooper's) ligament
Superficial inguinal ring
External spermatic fascia
Internal oblique → Cremasteric fascia & muscle
Along with tendon of transversus abdominis forms conjoint tendon
79. Stomach is supplied by ?
 a) Coeliac trunk

 b) Splenic artery

 c) Gastroduodenal artery

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., All of the above
80. What is the number of layers in greater omentum?
 a) 1

 b) 2

 c) 3

 d) 4



Correct Answer - D
The greater omentum is folded back on itself and is therefore made up of four layers of
closely applied visceral peritoneum, which are separated by variable amounts of adipose
tissue.
   81. Stomach wall is mainly drained by all
       lymphnodes except?
    a) Pyloric nodes

    b) Short gastric vessel nodal group

    c) Right gastroepiploic nodes

    d) Inguinal nodes



   Correct Answer - D
   Ans. is 'd' i.e., Inguinal nodes [Ref Gray's anatomy 20th edition]
   The stomach is drained by four groups of lymph nodes :
1. Left gastric arterial nodal group, which follows the left gastric artery
   and drain into the celiac nodes. They drain the lesser curvature of
   the stomach to the left.
2. Short gastric and left gastroepiploic vessels nodal group. The
   lymphatic vessels which drain the left side of the greater curvature of
   the stomach follows these vessels and drain into the
   pancreaticosplenic group of nodes.
3. Right gastroepiploic nodes, which drain the right half of the greater
   curvature of stomach as far as the pylorus
4. Pyloric nodes which drains the pyloric part of stomach to the hepatic
   , pyloric and left gastric nodes.
   All the vessels enter into the celiac node. From these nodes
   they pass into the intestinal lymph trunks, which then enter the
   cisterna chyli or the abdominal confluence of lymph trunks. The
   cisterna chyli drains into the thoracic duct.
82. All lymph of stomach drains into ?
 a) Pyloric nodes

 b) Short gastric vessel nodal group

 c) Right gastroepiploic nodes

 d) Coeliac nodes



Correct Answer - D
Ans. 'D' i.e., Coeliac nodes
All the vessels enter into the celiac node.
From these nodes, they pass into the intestinal lymph trunks, which
then enter the cisterna chyli or the abdominal confluence of lymph
trunks.
The cisterna chyli drains into the thoracic duct.
83. Gall bladder is realted to which segment
    of the liver?
 a) I

 b) II

 c) III

 d) IV



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., IV [Ref Gray's 40th le p. 1163-1167; Sabiston
18th/e p. 1584]
The gall bladder lies on the inferior surface of the liver closely
related to segment IV or the quadrate lobe.
Anatomically liver is divided into a large right lobe and a small left
lobe by line of attachment of falciform ligament (anterosuperiorly),
fissure for ligamentum teres (inferiorly), and fissure for ligamentum
venosum (posteriorly).
Right lobe is much larger and forms five sixth of liver and left lobe
forms only one sixth. Caudate lobe and quadrate lobe are parts of
anatomical right lobe.
The physiological left lobe is composed of 4 segments designated
Ito IV and is supplied by left branch of hepatic artery, left branch of
portal vein and drained by left hepatic duct.
The physiological right lobe consists of segment V, VI, VII and VIII
and is supplied by right hepatic artery, right branch of portal vein and
drained by right hepatic duct.
84. Which segment of liver drains on both
    sides ?
 a) I

 b) II

 c) III

 d) IV



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'A' i.e., I
Caudate lobe (segment I)
It is situated on the posterior surface of the right lobe.
It is bounded on right by a groove for IVC, on left by fissure for
ligamentum venosum, and inferiorly by porta hepatis (containing
hepatic artery, portal vein, hepatic duct bile duct, nerve plexus, and
lymphatics).
Just behind the porta hepatis, the caudate lobe is connected to the
rest of the right lobe by the caudate process.
There is a small rounded elevation to the left, called the papillary
process.
Caudate lobe lies in the superior recess of lesser sac and is related
to the crura of the diaphragm, right inferior phrenic artery, and
coeliac trunk.
Caudate lobe (anatomical part of the right lobe) belongs
physiologically to both right and left lobes because it receives blood
from the right and left hepatic arteries; right and left branches of the
portal vein, and drains bile into both the right and left hepatic duct.
Thus it is considered as the physiologically independent lobe.
85. Caudate lobe of the liver - True is?
 a) It receives blood supply from both right and left hepatic arteries

 b) It is Segment II of the liver

 c) It is situated on the anterior surface of liver

 d) It lies between the aorta and ligamentum venosum



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., It receives blood supply from both right and left
hepatic arteries [Ref Ramesh Babu p. 249]
Caudate tube (segment I) is situated on posterior surface of liver
between IVC & ligamentum venosum. It receives blood supply from
right & left arteries.
86. Superior border of epiploic foramen
    formed by -
 a) Caudate lobe

 b) Hepatic artery

 c) Bile duct

 d) IVC



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Caudate lobe
Epiploic foramen (foramen of Winslow or aditus to lesser sac) is a
slit-like opening through which lesser sac communicates with greater
sac. It is situated at the level of T12 vertebra. Its boundaries are:-
Anterior:- Right free margin of lesser omentum (contains portal vein,
hepatic artery proper and bile duct).
Posterior:- IVC, right suprarenal gland and T12 vertebra.
Superior:- Caudate lobe of the liver.
Inferior:- 1st part of the duodenum and horizontal part of the hepatic
artery.
87. Internal anal Sphincter is formed by ?
 a) Puborectalis

 b) Circular muscles from lower rectum

 c) Longitudinal Involuntary muscles

 d) None



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Circular muscles from lower rectum [Ref BDC
4th/e Vol. H p. 383; Gray's Anatomy 40thie Chapter 67]
External sphincter is contributed by fibers from puborectalis part of
levator ani muscle (in upper most part); superficial transverse
perineal muscles anteriorly and anococcygeal raphe posteriorly (in
upper third) and anococcygeal ligament (in middle third).
88. All of the following are true about
    duodenum except?
 a) Fourth part is the shortest part

 b) Ampulla of Vater opens through the second part

 c) Minor duodenal papilla is in the third part

 d) First part appears like a duodenal cap on barium studies



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Minor duodenal papilla is in the third part [Ref
BDC 6'1* Vol. 2 p. 259-262]
Third part (Horizonal part) :
It is 10 cm (4 inches) long. It begins at inferior duodenal flexure and
passes towards the left in front of IVC behind superior mesenteric
vessels and root of mesentery to meet 4th part of duodenum.
   89. Which of the following is a branch of the
       inferior mesenteric artery?
    a) Sigmoid artery

    b) Middle colic artery

    c) Renal artery

    d) Right Colic artery



   Correct Answer - A
   Ans. is 'a' i.e., Sigmoid artery [Ref BDC 6th/e yoi. 2 p. 276]
   Inferior mesentric artery gives following branches ?
1. Left colic artery
2. Sigmoid arteries
3. Superior rectal artery
   90. Waldeyer's fascia connects ?
    a) Rectum to sacrum

    b) Rectum to uterus

    c) Rectum to lateral wall of pelvis

    d) Rectum to bladder



   Correct Answer - A
   Ans. is 'a' i.e., Rectum to sacrum [Ref Clinical anotomy 2"d le p.
   786]
   Support of rectum include
1. Fascia of waldeyer : It attaches the lower part of rectal ampulla to
   the sacrum. It is formed by condensation of pelvic fascia behind the
   rectum and encloses the superior rectal vessels and lymphatics.
2. Lateral ligaments of the rectum : It is formed by condensation of
   pelvic fascia and encloses middle rectal vessels, and branches of
   pelvic plexuses.
3. Rectovesical fascia of denonvilliers : It extends from rectum (behind)
   to the prostate and seminal vesicle in front.
4. Pelvic peritoneum and related vascular pedicles.
   Perinea( body with its muscles.
91. Content of Alcock's canal is ?
 a) Internal pudendal artery

 b) Internal iliac artery

 c) Inferior rectal vein

 d) Inferior mesenteric vein



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e.,Internal pudendal artery [Ref BDC 6th/e Vol-2
p. 362]
Pudendal canal (Alcock's canal) is a fascial canal in the lateral wall
of ischeorectal (ischeo-anal) fossa, enclosing pudendal nerve and
internal pudendal vessels (artery and vein). It is a space between
obturator fascia and lunate fascia. Other believe that it is formed by
splitting of the obturator fascia.
92. All of the following organs are in direct
    contact with the spleen except?
 a) Duodenum

 b) Stomach

 c) Left kidney

 d) Colon



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Duodenum
Gross morphology of the spleen
Spleen has two ends (anterior or lateral and posterior or medial),
three borders (superior, inferior and intermediate), two surfaces
(visceral and diaphragmatic), two angles (anterobasal angle and
posterobasal angle) and hilum.
The anterior end is supported by the phrenicocolic ligament.
The superior border is characteristically notched near its anterior
end.
The visceral surface is related to the fundus of stomach (at gastric
impression), left kidney (at renal impression), splenic flexure of the
colon (at colic impression) and tail of the pancreas (at pancreatic
impression). Its lower end is related to the phrenicocolic
ligament. The diaphragmatic surface is related to the diaphragm.
93. Glans penis is a continuation of -
 a) Corpus spongiosum

 b) Ischiocavernosus

 c) Corpora Cavernosa

 d) Puborectalis



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'A' i.e., Corpus spongiosum
The penis is the male organ of copulation. The penis has a root and
a body.
The root of the penis is situated in the superficial perinea! pouch,
attached to the inferior surface of the perineal membrane. It consists
of three masses of erectile tissue: the bulb of the penis and two
crura. Each crus continues forward to become the corpus
cavernusum (in the body) and the bulb is the posterior end of the
corpus spongiosum (of the body).
The body of the penis is the free portion of the penis. It is composed
of three elongated masses of erectile tissues:- right and left corpora
cavernosa, and median corpus spongiosum. Corpora cavernosae
are enveloped by tunica albuginea and corpus spongiosum is also
surrounded by tunica albuginea. The penile urethra runs through the
whole length of the corpus spongiosum from the bulb at the back to
the terminal expanded part of the corpus spongiosum, called the
glans penis.
94. Which muscle causes opening of the
    upper end of esophagus?
 a) Epiglottis

 b) Thyropharungeus

 c) Stylopharyngeus

 d) Cricopharyngeus of inferior constrictor



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Cricopharyngeus of inferior constrictor [Ref Hall,
Arthur C. Guyton, John E. (2005). Textbook of medical
physiology (11th ed.). Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders. p. 782-784.]
Upper esophageal sphinctor
The upper esophageal sphincter surrounds the upper part of the
esophagus.
It consists of skeletal muscle, but is not under voluntary control.
Opening of the upper esophageal sphincter is triggered by the
swallowing reflex.
The primary muscle of the upper esophageal sphincter is the
cricopharyngeal part of the inferior pharyngeal constrictor.
95. Posterior perforation of stomach,
    collection of contents occurs in which
    pouch ?
 a) Greater sac

 b) Left subhepatic and hepatorenal spaces [pouch of Morrison]

 c) Omental bursa

 d) Right subphrenic space



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'B' i.e., Left subhepatic and hepatorenal spaces [pouch
of Morrison]
A posterior gastric ulcer may perforate into the lesser sac (omental
bursa). The leaking fluid passes out through epiploic foramen to
reach the hepatorenal pouch. Sometimes in these cases the epiploic
foramen is closed by adhesions. Then the lesser sac becomes
distended, and can be drained by a tube passed through the lesser
omentum.
  96. Cremastric muscle is formed from ?
    a) Fascia from internal oblique

    b) Fascia from external oblique

    c) Fascia from rectus abdominis

    d) Fascia from transversus abdominis



   Correct Answer - A
   Ans. is 'a' i.e., Fascia from internal oblique
   The layers of scrotum from outside to inside are :-
1. Skin
2. Dartos muscle (smooth muscle layer) continuous with Colles fascia
   of perineum posteriorly and Scarpa's fascia and Camper's fascia
   anteriorly .
3. The external spermatic fascia, extension from external oblique.
4. The cremasteric muscle, continuous with fascia from internal
   oblique.
5. The internal spermatic fascia, continuous with fascia from fascia
   transversalis.
97. Kidney is covered by what fascia?
 a) Sibson's fascia

 b) Buck's Fascia

 c) Gerota's Fascia

 d) None



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Gerota's Fascia [Ref Farlex Partner Medical
Dictionary Farlex 2012]
Renal fascia
There are four coverings around the kidney (from within outwords) :-
True capsule (fibrous capsule)
It is formed by the condensation of fibrous stroma of kidney.
False capsule (renal fascia or fascia of Gerota)
It is formed by condensation of extra-peritoneal connective tissue
around kidney and is continuous laterally with fascia transversalis.
False capsule consists of two layers : anterior "fascia of Toldt" and
posterior "fascia of Zuckerkendl".
98.
   Narrowest part of ureter is ?
    a) Brim of the pelvis

    b) Crossing by gonadal vessels

    c) Vesicouretric junction

    d) Crossing by ductus deferens



   Correct Answer - C
   Ans. is 'c' i.e., Vesicouretric junction [Ref Campbellis urology
   6thle p. 2123; Gray's Anatomy for students 1"/e p. 325]
   Ureter measures about 3 mm in diameter, but is constricted at
   five places
1. Pelviureteric junction
2. Brim of lesser pelvis (at the level of bifurcation of common iliac
   artery and crossing of external iliac artery
3. Point of crossing of ureter by ductus deferens or broad ligamentl
4. Entry in bladder wall (this vesicoureteral junction is the narrowest
   part of ureter)
5. Opening in lateral angle of trigone
99. What is the total length of the colon?
 a) 1 metre

 b) 1.5 metres

 c) 2 metres

 d) 4 metres



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., 1.5 metres [Ref BDC Vol. II ele p. 269-273]
The large intestine extends from the ileocaecal junction to anus.
It is 1.5 meters long and is divided into caecum, ascending colon,
right colic (hepatic) flexure, transverse colon, left colic
(splenic)flexure, descending colon, sigmoid colon, the rectum and
anal canal.
Transverse colon is longest part (50 cm) and anal canal
shortest (3.8 cm).
Caecum → 6 cm Sigmoid colon→ 37.5 cm
Ascending colon -› 12.5 cm Rectum → 12 cm
Transverse colon → 50 cm Anal canal → 3.8 cm Descending colon
→ 25 cm
   100. Submandibular lymphnodes drain the
        following areas of the face except?
    a) Medial half of eyelids

    b) Central part of lower lip

    c) Medial part of cheek

    d) Central part of fore head



   Correct Answer - B
   Ans. is 'b' i.e., Central part of lower lip [Ref BDC Vol. III 6th/e p.
   73] Lymphatic drainage of face
   The face possesses three areas from which lymphatic drainage
   is as follows:?
1. Upper area, comparising greater part of forehead, lateral Vi of
   eyelids, conjunctiva, lateral part of cheek and parotid area, drains
   into preauricular (superficial) parotid nodes.
2. Middle area, comprising central part of forehead, external nose,
   upper lip, lateral part of lower lip, medial halves of eyelids, medial
   part of cheek, and greater part of lower jaw, drains into
   submandibular nodes.
3. Lower area, including central part of lower lip and the chin, drains
   into submental nodes.
101. Larynx below the vocal cords drain into
     ?
 a) Pretracheal lymph nodes

 b) Occipital lymphnodes

 c) Mediastinal nodes

 d) Lymphatics along the superior laryngeal vein



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Pretracheal lymph nodes
Supraglottic part (Above vocal cord)
Lymphatics along the superior laryngeal vein and nodes adjacent to
the thyrohyoid membrane
Infraglottic part (Below vocal cord)
Pretracheal and prelaryngeal nodes
Vocal cords
Devoid of lymphatic supply
102. Nerve supply to the angle of the
     mandible is by ?
 a) Posterior primary rami of C2, C3

 b) Greater auricular nerve

 c) Maxillary nerve

 d) Mandibular nerve



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Greater auricular nerve
The skin over the angle of the jaw (mandible) is supplied by the
anterior division of the greater auricular nerve.
103. Nerve supply to the tip of the nose is
     from?
 a) The ophthalmic division of the trigeminal nerve

 b) Greater auricular nerve

 c) The maxillary division of the trigeminal nerve

 d) Mandibular nerve



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Ophthalmic division of the trigeminal nerve
Tip of the nose and lower part of the dorsum of the nose are
supplied by the external nasal branch of the ophthalmic division of
the trigeminal nerve.
104. Dangerous space in the neck is found
     between?
 a) Buccopharyngeal fascia and alar fascia

 b) Prevertebral fascia and alar fascia

 c) Buccopharyngeal fascia and Prevertebral fascia

 d) None



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e.,Prevertebral fascia and alar fascia [Ref "Severe
soft tissue infections of the head and neck: a primer for critical
care physicians". Lung. 187 (5): 271-9.]
The danger space or alar space, is a region of the neck. The
common name originates from the risk that an infection in this space
can spread directly to the thorax, and, due to being a space
continuous on the left and right, can furthermore allow infection to
spread easily to either side.
It is bounded superiorly by the skull base, anteriorly by the alar
fascia and posteriorly by the prevertebral fascia. It comes to an end
at the level of the diaphragm.
The retropharyngeal space is found anterior to the danger zone,
between the alar fascia and buccopharyngeal fascia
105. Which muscle is attached to the disc of
     the temporomandibular joint?
 a) Buccinator

 b) Lateral pterygoid

 c) Masseter

 d) Temporalis



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'B i.e., Lateral pterygoid [Ref BDC 415/e Vol. 3 p. 145;
Last's anatomy 11'"/e
Lateral pterygoid
origin→ Upper head: Infra temporal surface & crest of greater wing
of sphenoid. Lower head: Lateral surface of lateral pterygoid plate.
Nerve supply→ Pterygoid fovea on Anterior division of the neck of
man → mandibular nerve. an audible, Articular disc and capsule
of temporomandibular joint.
Action → Depresses the mandible. Protrusion and side to side
movement.
106. Maxillary tubercle gives attachment to ?
 a) Lateral pterygoid

 b) Medial pterygoid

 c) Temporalis

 d) Masseter



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Medial pterygoid [Ref BDC Vol III 6th le p. 116]
Medial Pterygoid
Origin: Superficial head: Tuberosity of maxilla. Deep head: Medial
surface of lateral pterygoid plate & pyramidal process of palatine
bone.
Insertion: Medial surface of angle mandible & adjoining ramus.
Nerve supply: Branch from trunk of mandibular nerve
Action : Elevates the mandible, Protection & side to side movement.
107. Vidian nerve is also known as?
 a) Nerve of Pterygoid canal

 b) Greater Petrosal nerve

 c) Lesser Petrosal nerve

 d) Greater Auricular nerve



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Nerve of Pterygoid canal
The nerve of the pterygoid canal (Vidian nerve) is formed by the
junction of the greater petrosal nerve and the deep petrosal nerve
within the pterygoid canal containing the cartilaginous substance,
which fills the foramen lacerum.
It passes forward through the pterygoid canal with its corresponding
artery (artery of the pterygoid canal) and is joined by a small
ascending sphenoidal branch from the otic ganglion.
 It then enters the pterygopalatine fossa and joins the posterior angle
of the pterygopalatine ganglion.
108. Which of the following nuclei belong to the general visceral afferent column?
 a) Facial nerve nucleus

 b) Trigeminal nucleus

 c) Dorsal nucleus of vagus

 d) Nucleus ambiguus



Correct Answer - C
Visceral afferent fibers, also called general visceral afferent
fibers, convey sensation from the alimentary tract, heart, vessels,
and lungs by way of nerves IX and X. A specialized visceral afferent
component is involved with the sense of taste; fibers carrying
gustatory impulses are present in cranial nerves VII, IX, and X. The
general visceral afferent column is represented by part of the dorsal
nucleus of the vagus nerve.

Ref: Waxman S.G. (2010). Chapter 8. Cranial Nerves and
Pathways. In S.G. Waxman (Ed), Clinical Neuroanatomy, 26e.
109. Right Recurrent laryngeal nerve loops
     around?
 a) Right subclavian artery

 b) Right axillary artery

 c) Right External carotid artery

 d) Right Superior thyroid artery



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Right subclavian artery [Ref Larsen, William J.
(1993). Human embryology]
Recurrent laryngeal nerve
On right side it arises in the root of neck and winds around first part
of right subclavian artery. It may be anterior (superficial) or posterior
(deep) to inferior thyroid artery.
On left side it arises in thorax (superior mediastinum) and wind's
around the arch of aorta immediately behind the attachment of
ligamentum arteriosum. It is usually posterior (deep) to inferior
thyroid artery or between its branches.
Recurrent laryngeal nerve supplies all intrinsic muscles of larynx
(except cricothyroid) and mucous membrane of larynx below vocal
fold. It also gives branches to deep cardiac plexus, trachea,
esophagus and inferior constrictior.
Inferior thyroid artery is ligated away from gland to avoid injury to
nerve. Left nerve is more liable to damage.
110. Left recurrent laryngeal passes between
     ?
 a) Trachea & larynx

 b) Trachea & esophagus

 c) Esophagus and bronchi

 d) Esophagus and aorta



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Trachea & esophagus [Ref Gray's 38th/e p. 786]
The paths of the left and right recurrent laryngeal nerves very slightly
with the left recurrent laryngeal nerve dividing from the main vegus
nerve at the level of the aortic arch.
The left recurrent laryngeal nerve than dips posteriorly around the
arotic arch to assend through the superior mediastinum to enter the
groove between the esophagus and trachea.
The right recurrent laryngeal nerve divides from the main vagus
nerve at the level of the right subclavian artery to enter the superior
mediastinum.
The right recurrent laryngeal nerve then dips posteriorly around the
subclavian artery to assend in the grove between the esophagus
and trachea.
111. Structures pierced by the parotid duct
     are all except?
 a) Buccopharyngeal fascia

 b) Buccinator muscle

 c) Buccal fat pad

 d) Investing layer of deep cervical fascia



Correct Answer - D
Ans. 'd' i.e., Investing layer of deep cervical fascia
The parotid duct (Stenson's duct)
Parotid duct emerges from the anterior border of the gland and
passes forward over the lateral surface of the masseter and can be
palpated at the tense anterior margin of the masseter muscle.
In its course duct pierces buccal fat pad, buccopharyngeal fascia
and buccinator muscle (obliquely) and opens on the mucous
membrane of cheek opposite to second upper molar tooth.
When intraoral pressure is raised (during blowing) the duct is
compressed between the buccinator and mucous membrane,
preventing inflation of the duct.
112. Which layer of the scalp is vascular?
 a) Pericranium

 b) Superficial fascia

 c) Skin

 d) Aponeurosis



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Superficial fascia
The scalp is a soft tissue that covers the calvaria of the skull. It
consists of five layers and can be memorized by a mnemonic
using the initial letters of the word. SCALP:?
Skin
Close network of connective tissue (superficial fascia)
Aponeurosis (galea aponeurotica) with occipitofrontalis muscles
Loose areolar (subaponeurotic) tissue
Pericranium (outer periosteum of the skull)
113. All of the following pass through the
     Sinus of morgagni except -
 a) Auditory tube

 b) Levator veli palatini

 c) Ascending palatine artery

 d) Stylopharyngeus



Correct Answer - D
Ans. 'd' i.e., Stylopharyngeus
Sinus of Morgagni is the large gap between the upper concave
border of the superior constrictor and the base of the skull.
The structures passing through it are:
1. Auditory tube
2. Levator veli palatini
3. Ascending palatine artery
4. Palatine branch of ascending pharyngeal artery
   114. Chorda tympani is a branch of ?
    a) Facial nerve

    b) Trigeminal nerve

    c) Greater auricular nerve

    d) External laryngeal nerve



   Correct Answer - A
   Ans. is 'a' i.e., Facial nerve [Ref: BDC 6th le Vol 3 p. 371]
   Branches of facial nerve
1. In fallopian (facial canal) :- Greater petrosal (greater superficial
   petrosal) nerve, nerve to stapedius, chorda tympani.
2. At its exit from stylomastoid foramen :- Posterior auricular, digastric
   nerve, stylohyoid nerve.
3. Terminal branches :- Temporal, zygomatic, buccal, marginal
   mandibular, and cervical.
115. Chorda-tympani does not carry which
     fibers?
 a) Preganglionic parasympathetic fibers for sublingual glands

 b) Preganglionic parasympathetic fibers for submandibular gland

 c) Preganglionic parasympathetic fibers for parotid gland

 d) Taste fibers from anterior two third of tongue



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Preganglionic parasympathetic fibers for parotid
gland
Chorda tympani is a branch of facial nerve mainly carrying taste
sensations from the anterior 2/3rd of the tongue
The chorda tympani carries two types of nerve fibers from their
origin with the facial nerve to the lingual nerve that carries them to
their destinations:
Special sensory fibers providing taste sensation from the anterior
two-thirds of the tongue.
Preganglionic parasympathetic fibers to the submandibular ganglion,
providing secretomotor innervation to two salivary glands: the
submandibular gland and sublingual gland and to the vessels of the
tongue, which when stimulated, cause dilation of blood vessels of
the tongue.
116. Which of the following pass through the
     Hypoglossal canal?
 a) Hypoglossal nerve

 b) External jugular vein

 c) Facial nerve

 d) Mandibular nerve



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Hypoglossal nerve [Ref BDC 6th/e Vol. 3 p. 18-20]
117. Which muscle is antagonist to
     orbicularis oculi that is not supplied by
     facial nerve?
 a) Levator Palpebrae superioris

 b) Orbicularis oris

 c) Superior oblique

 d) Inferior oblique



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Levator Palpebrae superioris
Orbicularis oculi closes the eye and is supplied by the facial nerve.
Levator Palpebrae superioris opens the eyelid and is supplied by the
oculomotor nerve.
   118. All of the following are main branches of
        Trigeminal nerve except ?
    a) Mandibular nerve

    b) Maxillary nerve

    c) Ophthalmic nerve

    d) Optic nerve



   Correct Answer - D
   Ans. is 'd' i.e., Optic nerve [Ref BDC 6th/e Vol 3 p. 369]
   Divisions of trigeminal nerve
1. Ophthalmic division (Ophthalmic nerve : V1)
2. Maxillary division (Maxillary nerve : V2)
3. Mandibular division (Mandibular nerve : V3)
119. Extension of the retropharyngeal space
     is between ?
 a) Alar fascia and buccopharyngeal fascia

 b) buccopharyngeal fascia and prevertebral fascia

 c) Alar fascia and Prevertebral fascia

 d) None



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Alar fascia and buccopharyngeal fascia
Retropharyngeal space
The retropharyngeal space is a potential space of the head and
neck, bounded by the buccopharyngeal fascia anteriorly and the alar
fascia posteriorly. Together with the lateral pharyngeal space, these
spaces are termed the parapharyngeal spaces.
It contains the retropharyngeal lymph nodes.
Because serious infections of teeth can spread down this space into
the posterior mediastinum, it is often confused with the danger
space. The danger space is actually between the alar fascia and the
prevertebral fascia and extends from the cranial base above to the
level of the diaphragm.
It is limited above by the base of the skull, and below where the alar
fascia fuses with the buccopharyngeal fascia at about the level of T4
and the carina.
120. Delphian nodes are ?
 a) Prelaryngeal nodes

 b) Occipital nodes

 c) Coeliac nodes

 d) None of the above



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Prelaryngeal nodes
The Delphian node (prelaryngeal) along with paratracheal nodes,
pretracheal nodes, perithyroidal nodes makeup level VI cervical
lymph nodes, and is not routinely excised in radical neck
dissections. It receives lymph from the thyroid and larynx.
The Delphian node gains its name from the Oracle of Delphi, whose
prophecy, in this case, would be of an unpleasant death secondary
to laryngeal cancer.
The involvement of this node can be a result of diffuse nodal
involvement in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma or isolation
from the direct lymphatic spread of laryngeal cancer through the
anterior commissure. Thyroid carcinomas may also involve this
node.
121. Straight sinus is formed by?
 a) Inferior Sagittal Sinus

 b) Internal Jugular veins

 c) Superior Sagittal Sinus

 d) Tranverse sinus



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Inferior Sagittal Sinus
The straight sinus, also known as tentorial sinus or the sinus rectus,
is an area within the skull beneath the brain that receives venous
blood.
Straight sinus is formed by the union of the inferior sagittal sinus with
the great cerebral vein. It is considered a continuation of the inferior
sagittal sinus.
It drains into the transverse sinus, most commonly in the left one.
The straight sinus is situated within the dura mater, where the falx
cerebri meets the midline of tentorium cerebelli.
In cross-section, it is triangular, contains a few transverse bands
across its interior, and increases in size as it proceeds backward.
   122. Which artery supplies the paracentral
        lobule?
    a) Medial Striate artery

    b) Calloso Marginal artery

    c) Pericallosal artery

    d) Frontopolar artery



   Correct Answer - B
   Ans. is 'b' i.e., Calloso Marginal artery [Ref BDC Vol. 3
   6th/e p. 461, 462]
   Calloso marginal artery is a branch of anterior cerebral artery
   that supplies the paracentral lobule which has a role in control
   of micturition
   Anterior cerebral artery
   Has following branches :-
1. Medial striate artery (recurrent artery of Heubner) : It supplies
   caudate nucleus (ventral part), putamen, and anterior limb and genu
   of internal capsule.
2. Fronto-polar artery : It supplies medial and orbital surfaces of frontal
   lobe.
3. Orbital branches : It supplies medial and orbital surfaces of frontal
   lobe.
4. Calloso-marginal artery : It supplies the paracentral lobule and parts
   of gyrus cinguli.
5. Pericallosal artery : It supplies medial surface of parietal lobe and
   precuneous.
123. Nucleus of basal ganglia
 a) Dentate

 b) Thalamus

 c) Caudate

 d) Red nucleus



Correct Answer - C
Ans: C i.e. Caudate nucleus
The basal ganglia have five nuclei on each side of the brain.
- Caudate nucleus
- Putamen
- Globus pallidus
- Subthalamic nucleus
- Substantia nigra
The caudate nucleus and putamen collectively form the striatum.
The putamen and globus pallidus collectively form the lentiform
nucleus.
The globus pallidus is divided into external and internal segments
124. Most lateral nucleus of cerebellum is ?
 a) Dentate

 b) Globose

 c) Fastigial

 d) Emboliform



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'A' i.e., Dentate
There are four deep cerebellar nuclei (from lateral to medial) :
dentate, emboliform, globose, and fastigial.
The globose and the emboliform nuclei are sometimes lumped
together as the interpositus nucleus.
125.
Superior marginal gyrus is a part of?
 a) Parietal lobe

 b) Frontal lobe

 c) Temporal lobe

 d) Occipital lobe



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Parietal lobe
The superior marginal gyrus is a portion of the parietal lobe.
This area of the brain is also known as Brodmann area 40 based on
the universally used brain map created by Korbinian Brodmann to
define the structures in the cerebral cortex.
126.
Pars dorsalis is a part of ?
 a) Cerebrum

 b) Cerebellum

 c) Pons

 d) Thalamus



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Pons [Ref Farlex Partner Medical Dictionary
Farlex 2012]
Pars Dorsalis
The part of the pons bounded laterally by the middle cerebellar
peduncles and anteriorly by the ventral part of pons; it is continuous
with the tegmentum of the mesencephalon and contains long tracts
such as the medialand lateral lemnisci, cranial nerve nuclei, and
reticular formatin.
127. Arbor vitae are seen in ?
 a) Cerebrum

 b) Cerebellum

 c) Pons

 d) Thalamus



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e.,Cerebellum
The arborvitae is the cerebellar white matter, so-called for its
branched, tree-like appearance.
In some ways, it more resembles a fern and is present in both the
cerebellar hemispheres.
It brings sensory and motor information to and from the cerebellum.
The arborvitae is located deep in the cerebellum.
Situated within the arborvitae are the deep cerebellar nuclei; the
dentate, globose, emboliform and the fastigial nuclei.
These four different structures lead to the efferent projections of the
cerebellum.
128. Total volume of CSF is?
 a) 150 ml

 b) 500 ml

 c) 50 ml

 d) 800 ml



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., 150ml
The major source of CSF is the choroidal plexus of all 4 ventricles,
mainly in two lateral ventricles. Other sources of CSF are ependymal
cells of the ventricles and the brain itself, via perivascular spaces.
The total volume of CSF in an adult is about 125-150 ml. The rate of
formation of CSF is about 500-550 ml/day. Thus the CSF is replaced
3-4 times every day.
The watery part of CSF is secreted by transduction but each of its
constitutions is actively transported. Na. is secreted into the CSF
with the help of Na+ ATPase. Glucose enters CSF through facilitated
diffusion mediated by GLUT-1. HCO3 is secreted with the help of
carbonic anhydrase.
129. Lateral lemniscus terminates into ?
 a) Lateral geniculate body

 b) Superior colliculus

 c) Inferior colliculus

 d) Inferior olivary complex



Correct Answer - C
Ans is 'c' i.e., Inferior colliculus [Ref BDC 6th /e Vol. .3 p. 374]
130. Internal capsule- All of the following are
     parts except ?
a) Anterior limb

b) Sublentiform part

c) Retrolentiform

d) Prelentiform



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Prelentiform
The internal capsule is divided from before backwards into
following parts:
Anterior limb
Posterior limb
Retrolentiform part
Genu
Sublentiform part
131. Substantia ferruginea is found in -
 a) Fourth ventricle

 b) Thalamus

 c) Midbrain

 d) Third ventricle



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e.,Fourth ventricle [Ref Medical Dictionary, 2009
Farlex and Partners]
It is a shallow depression, of a blue color in the fresh brain,
lying laterally in the most rostral portion of the rhomboidal
fossa near the cerebral aqueduct; it lies near the lateral wall of
the fourth ventricle and consists of about 20,000 melanin-
pigmented neuronal cell bodies the norepinephrine-containing
axons of which have a remarkably wide distribution in the
cerebellum as well as in the hypothalamus and cerebral cortex.
Also called as locus cinereus, locus ferrugineus.
132. Infundibular diverticulum is an extention
     of ?
 a) 1st and 2th ventricles

 b) 3rd ventricle

 c) 4th ventricle

 d) None



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'B' i.e., 3rd ventricle
Third ventricle is a midline cavity of diencephalon. It is a median cleft
between two thalami. Anterosuperiorly it communicates with lateral
ventricle through the interventricular foramen (foramen of Monro).
Posteroinferiorly it communicates with fourth ventricle through
cerebral aqueduct (Duct of Sylvius).
There are four extensions (recesses) of third ventricle : (a)
Suprapineal recess, (b) Pineal recess, (c) Infundibular recess, and
(d) Optic recess.
133. Which of the following is a complete
     sulcus in the brain?
 a) Calcarine sulcus

 b) Paracentral sulcus

 c) Both

 d) None



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Calcarine sulcus
The calcarine sulcus (or calcarine fissure) is an anatomical
landmark located at the caudal end of the medial surface of the
brain of humans and other primates. Its name comes from the
Latin "calcar" meaning "spur". It is a complete sulcus.
For accommodation in a limited space within the rigid cranial box,
the cerebral cortex is folded into numerous gyri or convolutions
separated by sulci or fissures. Eventually the total surface area of
the cortex of human brain is increased to about 2200 cm2, in which
only about one third of the cortex is exposed as gyri and two third is
hidden in the sulci.
134. Which of the following is derived from
     the neural tube except?
 a) Retina

 b) Brain

 c) Dorsal root ganglia

 d) Pineal gland



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e.,Dorsal root ganglia [Ref Textbook of human
embryology -786]
Nervous system develops from ectoderm (neuroectoderm). Nervous
system develops from neural tube which in turn devtlops by process
of neurulation, i.e. formation of neural plate and its infolding into
neural tube.
   135. Cerebellovestibular fibres pass through
        ?
    a) Superior cerebellar peduncle

    b) Middle cerebellar peduncle

    c) Inferior cerebellar peduncle

    d) None



   Correct Answer - C
   Ans. is 'c' i.e.,Inferior cerebellar peduncle [Ref BDC Vol. III 6th le
   p. 405]
   Inferior cerebellar peduncle →
1. Posterior spinocerebellar
2. Cuneocerebellar (posterior external arcuate fibres)
3. Olivocerebellar
4. Parolivocerebellar
5. Reticulocerebellar
6. Vestibulocerebellar
7. Anterior external arcuate fibres
8. Striae medullares
136. Long spinous process is seen in ?
 a) Cervical vertebrae

 b) Thoracic Vertebrae

 c) Lumbar Vertebrae

 d) Sacrum



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Thoracic Vertebrae [Ref: BDC 5th/e Vol. 3 p. 40]
137. Movement occuring at atlanto-axial
     joint?
 a) Flexion

 b) Bending

 c) Rotation

 d) Nodding



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e.,Rotation [Ref: Clinical anatomy 3rdie p. 786]
Movments permitted at atlanto-occipital joint are : -
Flexion and extension (nodding of head), and (ii) Lateral flexion
(bending of neck).
Movements permitted at atlanto-axial joints are side-to-side rotation
of head (looking towards right-or-left).
138. Spinal segmental artery is a branch of ?
 a) Ascending spinal artery

 b) Basilar artery

 c) Posterior spinal artery

 d) Anterior spinal artery



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e.,Ascending spinal artery [Ref Spinal Cord
Medicine. Demos Medical Publishing.]
Arterial supply of spinal cord
139. Which of the following is not a
     permanent mucosal fold?
 a) Heister's valves

 b) Transverse rectal fold

 c) Plicae circularis

 d) Gastric rugae



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Gastric rugae [Ref Inderbir Singh Histology p.
240; BDC 4th/e Vol. H p. 241, 245, 274,
378; Gray's 40th le p. 1138, 1120, 1151, 1132, 1178]
Gastric rugae of stomach, and longitudinal folds in mucosa of upper
rectum and colon are temporary mucosal folds and are obliterated
by distension. Whereas, plica circularis (valves of kerkring) of small
intestine, crescentic mucosal folds of cystic duct (spiral valve of
Heister), transverse (horizontal) rectal folds (Houston's valves or
plica transversalis) and permanent longitudanal rectal columns or
folds (found in
140. Lipid rafts are seen in?
 a) Ribosomes

 b) Mitochondria

 c) Plasma membrane

 d) ER



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Plasma membrane.
* Lipid rafts are regions in plasma membrane that accumulate
Cholesterol and glycolipids (glycosphingolipids).
  - So there regions are slightly thicker than other areas of plasma
membrane.
  - Because f distinct molecular composition of lipid rafts, they can
act us microcompartment within cells, giving the cell an additional
way to organize pathways.
  - Involved in the regulation of signal transduction.
Types of lipid rafts:
* Planar lipid rafts (noncaveolar or glycolipid rafts)
  - Continuous with plane of cell membrane (they are not invaginate).
Caveolae:
* Specialized types of lipid rafts which are flask like invaginations of
plasma membrane.
* Produced where caveolin protein is present in lipid bilayer
membrane.
141. Marker of endoplasmic reticulum?
 a) Acid phosphatase

 b) Glucose-6-phosphatase

 c) Catalase

 d) LDH



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Glucose-6-phosphatase.
Organelle or fraction Markers
Plasma membrane - Adenyl cyclase, Na+IC ATPase
Lysosome - Acid phosphatase
Golgi apparatus - Galactosyl transferase, Golgi mannosidase II,
Sialyl transferase, G1cNAc transferase.
Endoplasmic reticulum - Glucose-6-phosphatase
Peroxisome - Catalase, Urate (uric acid) oxidase
Cytosol - Lactate dehydrogenase
Nucleus - DNA
Ribosome - High content of RNA
142. Following is a feature of simple
     diffusion?
 a) Against a concentration gradient

 b) Easy for non-polar substance

 c) More in thick membrane

 d) Requires carrier protein



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Easy for non-polar substance
Simple diffusion:
Refers to diffusion of molecule across the membrane following a
concentration gradient or chemical gradient, but without the help of
any carrier protein.
Factors influencing:
A) Rate of diffusion is directly proportionate :-
Concentration (chemical) gradient
Cross-sectional area of the membrane through which diffusion takes
place
Lipid solubility of the substance
B) Rate of diffusion is inversely proportionate:-
Thickness of diffusion membrane
Size of the particle
Charge or polarity of substance
So, simple diffusion is favored by small size, lipid solubility and
absence of polarity (non-polar substance) and charge (neutral
molecule) through a thin, large membrane where the concentration
gradient is more.
143. Most common mechanism for transport
     into the cell?
a) Diffusion

b) Primary active transport

c) Antiport

d) Cotransport



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Diffusion.
(Ref Principles of medical physiology p.3.)
Most important and most common mechanism of transport is
passive diffusion.
144. True about Nernst equation?
 a) Used to calculate equilibrium potential

 b) Calculated for non-ionic solution

 c) Nernst potential for Cl is -90 my

 d) All are correct



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Used to calculate equilibrium potential.
[Ref: Ganong 24th le p.9; Principles of medical physiology p.8]
RMP value is calculated on basis of Nernst equation.
Also referred "Nernst potential/Equilibrium potential/Diffusion
potential of K+.
145. ECF concentration of 1C. is 150 meq/L
      and ICF concentration of le is 5 meq/L.
      What is the equilibrium potential for K+
      is?
 a) +60 mV

 b) -60 mV

 c) -90 mV

 d) +90 mV



Correct Answer - C
Ans. 'c' i.e., -90 mV
Nernst Equation –
Can be used to find the cell potential at any moment in during a
reaction or at conditions other than standard-state.



E = cell potential (V) under specific conditions
E= cell potential at standard-state conditions\
R = ideal gas constant = 8.314 J/mol-K
T = temperature (kelvin), which is generally 25C (298 K)
n = number of moles of electrons transferred in the balanced
equation
F = Faraday's constant, the charge on a mole of electrons =
95,484.56 C/mol
lnQc = the natural log of the reaction quotient at the moment in time.
       - 61         150
EK =        log       = 90 mV
       +1         5
146. Nernnst equation related to equilibrium
     potential does not depend upon?
 a) Concentration gradient

 b) Electric gradient

 c) Non-ionic solution

 d) Concentration of ions in two solution



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Non-ionic solution
[Ref Guyton 12th/e p.50; Principles of medical physiology p. 8]
Nernst equation is for ionic solution.
147. Due to Donnan-Gibbs effect?
 a) Concentration of K. is greater in ECF

 b) Concentration of cl is greater in ECF

 c) Total ions are more in ICF

 d) All are true



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Total ions are more in ICF
[Ref Principles of medical physiology p.7]
Gibbs-Donnan equilibrium:
The mammalian cells (intracellular fluid) contains non-diffusible
anion like proteins and organic phosphate where as K' and Cl- are
diffusible cation and anion, respectively.
The ECF contains 1K+ and Cl- as diffusible cation and anion
respectively.
Due to Gibbs-Donnan equilibrium :-
Concentraion of Cl- is greater in ICF than ECF (concentration of
diffusible cation is greater in compartment with non-diffusible anion).
Concentration of Cl is greater in ECF than ICF.
Total number of ions is greater in ICF than ECF.
All these effects help to maintain the shape and volume of cells by
distributing diffusible ions across the membrane according to
physiological demand.
148. ATPase is which type of pump?
 a) Secondary active

 b) Electrogenic

 c) Symport

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Electrogenic
[Ref Ganong 24th/e p.51, 10; Guyton 12th/e p.53]
Sodium-potassium pump:
* Most important pump for primary active transport in body.
* An Electrogenic pump.
* Responsible for maintaining Na+ & K+ conc. difference across cell
membrane.
Mechanism:
* ICF - High K+ concentration.
* ECF - High Na+ concentration.
* Both Na+ & K+ transported against concentration gradient.
* Uses energy by hydrolyzing ATP;
Functions:
* Pump contains ATPase activity.
* Na+-K+ pump extrudes -
  - 3 Na+ out from cell.
  - Pumps 2 K+ into cell.
  - Coupling ratio of Na+-K+pump - 3:2.
149. Diffusion related to 02 transport across
     respiratory membrane is an example of?
 a) Simple diffusion

 b) Facilitated diffusion

 c) Active diffusion

 d) Osmotic diffusion



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Simple diffusion.
[Ref. Ganong 25thle p. 51 & 24thle p. 53]
Simple diffusion - Movement of fats, oxygen, CO, through lipid
portion of membrane.
Facilitated diffusion - Movement of glucose and some amino-acids.
Primary active transport - Ions K+, Na*,
Secondary active transport - Glucose or or amino-acid into the cell
along Na` (Sympoft or cotransport) 1-1+ out of the cell against Na+
(Antiport or countertransport).
150. Measurement of intracellular fluid in a 50
     years old male is done by?
 a) Dilution method

 b) Evans blue

 c) D20


 d) Indirectly



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Indirectly.
 [Ref Ganong 23th/e p. 3-6; Guyton 12th/e p. 286-288]
Most of the fluid is calculated directly by dilution method, except for
intracellular fluid (ICF) and interstitial fluid.
Both these are calculated indirectly by calculating other body fluids.
ICF = Total body water volume - ECF volume Interstitial fluid = ECF
volume - Plasma volume.
151. Calculation of interstitial fluid in a 50
     years old is done by?
 a) TBW minus ECF

 b) ECF minus plasma volume

 c) ICF minus ECF

 d) TBW minus ICF



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. ECF minus plasma volume.
[Ref Ganong 23th/e p. 3-6; Guyton 12th/e p. 286-288]
Most of the fluid is calculated directly by dilution method, except for
intracellular fluid (ICF) and interstitial fluid.
Both these are calculated indirectly by calculating other body fluids.
ICF = Total body water volume - ECF volume Interstitial fluid = ECF
volume - Plasma volume.
152. Excitability of cells is maximally affected
     by change in concentration of which
     ion?
 a) IC+

 b) Na*

 c) a-

 d) Ca+2



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Ca+2
[Ref Principles of medical physiology p.801]
Effects of ion concentration change on membrane potential:
* Hypercalcemia
  - An increase in extracellular Ca2+ concentration can stabilize the
membrane by decreasing excitability.
* Hypocalcemia
  - Calcium ion is membrane stabilizers.
  - A decrease in extracellular Ca2+ concentration increases the
excitability of nerve by decreasing the amount of depolarization
necessary to produce the action potential.
  - Hyperexcitability is seen.
153. Non-specific pain pathway is for?
 a) Nociceptive pain

 b) Neuropathic pain

 c) Idiopathic pain

 d) Inflammatory pain



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Idiopathic pain
[Ref Textbook of psychotherapy p.6]
Pain may be divided into: -
Nociceptive pain:
It is musculoskeletal pain that results from injury or inflammatory or
degenerative disorders, e.g. bone fracture or arthritis or burn.
Neuropathic pain:
It is due to dysfunction/damage of nerves, e.g. prolapse
intervertebral disc.
Mixed pain:
It has components of both nociceptive and neuropathic pains.
Idiopathic or unspecified pain:
It is purely psychological in nature and is therefore called
psychogenic pain.
154. Dull visceral pain is carried by which
     type of neurons?
 a) A gamma

 b) Aa

 c) C fibres

 d) B



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. “C” fibers.
[Ref Ganong 24th\e p. 92 & 23rdle p. 89]
A viscus does not have any other sensation (e.g. touch, temperature
etc) except pain.
Due to sparse distribution of pain receptors, visceral pain is poorly
localized.
Visceral pain sensation is carried by type - C afferents in the
sympathetic system (from thoracic and abdominal viscera) and
parasympathetic system (from pelvic viscera).
155. 'C' fibers carry sensations through which
     pathway?
 a) Posterior column

 b) Anterior spinothalamic tract

 c) Lateral spinothalamic tract

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Lateral spinothalamic tract.
[Ref Ganong 23rdie p.648; Goyton 12th le p.573].
C fibers carry Pain (slow pain) and temperature sensation.
These are carried by lateral spinothalamic tract.
156. Types C nerve fibers are?
 a) Sensory

 b) Motor

 c) Mixed

 d) Any of the above



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. sensory.
Type C fibers:
Postganglionic autonomic fibers.
Sensory function afferent to temperature & pressure.
No motor function.
157. Warmth sensation is carried by?
 a) A a fibers

 b) A (3 fibers

 c) A y fibers

 d) A S fibers



Correct Answer - A
Ans. a. A a fibers
[Ref Ganong 25"Ye p. 94 & 24"le p. 92; Principles of physiology p.
512]
Temperature (warmth/cold) sensation is carried by Aδ & C fibers.
158. True about myosin?
 a) Thin filament

 b) Covers active site of action

 c) Has ATPase activity

 d) Ca' binding protein



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Has ATPase activity
[Ref Ganong 241th le p.100, 102]
The shortening of muscle fiber occurs due to sliding of actin
filaments on myosin filament.
However, there are four muscle proteins involved in the process: -
Actin, Myosin, Tropomyosin, and troponin.
Myosin:
Myosin is the protein that constitutes the thick filaments. Myosin of
skeletal muscle is myosin-II.
Myosin participates in the contractile mechanism and also acts as an
ATPase.
159. In cardiac muscles, T-tubules are present
     at?
 a) Z lines

 b) A lines

 c) I lines

 d) A-I junction



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. “Z” lines.
[Ref Principles of medical physiology p.794]
The cardiac muscle cell contains actin, myosin the sarcotubular
system and other organelles seen in skeletal muscles.
However, the T system of cardiac muscle is located at Z lines rather
than at A-I junction, where it is located in skeletal muscles.
160. In a muscle fiber at rest, the length of the
     I band is 1 mm and A band is 1.5 mm.
     What is the length of the sarcomere
 a) 0.5 mm

 b) 2.5 mm

 c) 3 5 mm
    .




 d) 5 mm



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. 2.5 mm.
Sarcomere is the portion of myofibril between two Z lines.
Thus, length of sarcomere in given question = 0.5 mm (1/2 I band) +
1.5 mm (A band) + 0.5 mm (1/2 I band) = 2.5 mm.
161. White fibers are present in which
     muscle?
 a) Calf muscles

 b) Back muscles

 c) Gluteal muscles

 d) Hand muscles



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Hand muscles.
[Ref Principles of medical physiology p.118]
Type of muscle fibers:
Type 1 (red) or type 2 (white).
Most of the muscle in human body contains both types of fibers, i.e.
most muscles in the body have both types of motor units.
But, some muscles have more type 1 fibers (type 1 motor units) than
type 2, and vice-versa.
Accordingly, skeletal muscles can be divided into :
Red muscles
These muscles contain more type 1 (red) fibers, therefore are slow
twitch muscles and contain more myoglobin content.
These are muscles which require prolonged contraction, for
example, muscles which help in maintaining posture, i.e. Back
muscles gluteus muscles (at back of hip) and calf muscles.
White (pale) muscles
These muscles contain more type 2 (white) fibers and are fast twitch
muscles.
These are muscles which help rapid contractions and finer
movements.
Examples are Hand muscles and extra ocular muscles.
162. Function of muscle spindle is?
 a) Movement of a limb

 b) Muscle tone maintenance

 c) Goal oriented muscle contraction

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Muscle tone maintenance
[Ref Understanding of medical physiology p.138]
If a skeletal muscle is stretched, it respond by contracting.
In other words, if a muscle is stretched, it tends to become shorter
and more stiff, thereby resisting stretch.
This is because of receptor sensitive to stretch within the muscle.
Stretch receptor within a muscle is called "muscle spindles".
Stretch reflex has two principal functions:
1) To maintain muscle tone
Tone is a tendency of a muscle to resist being stretched.
Muscle tone is not only important for maintaining posture but also
facilitates locomotion and makes all voluntary movement smooth.
2) To make muscles respond to stretch and release.
163. Afferents for stretch reflexes are carried
     by which fibers?
 a) Aa

 b) Ay

 c) Type B

 d) Type C



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Aa
[Ref Ganong 24th/e p. 229]
Sensory innervation (afferent) of muscle spindle:
Two types of sensory nerve fibers (afferent) originate from the
intrafusal fibers :
Annulospiral (Primary) ending are wound around the central region
of both nuclear bag fiber and nuclear chain fiber.
These are Aα (or Iα) fibers.
Flower-spray (Secondary) endings innervate the peripheral parts
(ends) of nuclear chain fiber.
These are Aβ or (or II) fibers.
164. Spinal cord has how many synapses in
     golgi tendon reflex?
 a) 1

 b) 2

 c) 3

 d) 4



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. 2
[Ref: Principles of medical physiology p. 786]
Strech reflex through muscle spindle → Monosynaptic
Golgi tendon reflex → Bisynaptic.
165. Inverse stretch reflex is a?
 a) Monosynaptic reflex

 b) Bisynaptic reflex

 c) Polysynaptic reflex

 d) Nonsynaptic reflex



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Bisynaptic reflex
[Ref Principles of medical physiology 3rd/e p.786]
Golgi tendon reflex (inverse stretch reflex) is bisynaptic reflex.
166. Facilitatory presynaptic neurotransmitter
     is?
 a) GABA

 b) Glycine

 c) Glutamate

 d) Aspartate



Correct Answer - C:D
Ans. is 'c > d' i.e., Glutamate > Aspartate
[Ref Understanding of medical physiology 1"/e p.412]
Glutamate is the chief excitatory neurotransmitter in the brain and
spinal cord.
Aspartate seems to be the chief excitatory neurotransmitter of
cortical pyramidal cells.
167.
Nissl's granules are found in which part of
nerve cell -
 a) Axon hillock

 b) Axons

 c) Node of Ranvier

 d) Body



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Body
[Ref Chaudhri 7h/e Principles of medical physiology-7]
Nissl Bodies (Nissl granule or tigroid body):
Nissl bodies are large granular body found in neuron.
Present all over the soma (body), excepting axon hillock and they
extend to some extent in the dendrites, but not within the axon.
These granules are rough endoplasmic reticulum with free
ribosomes and are the site of protein synthesis.
They are thought to be involved in the synthesis of neurotransmitter
such as acetylcholine.
Nissl bodies are basophilic granules.
Chromatolysis (disappearance of Nissl bodies) is an important
histological sign of neuronal injury.
When the demand of the protein synthesis is great the nissl granules
overwork and many altogether disappear (chromatolysis).
168. Stereocilia are found in?
 a) Eye

 b) Nose

 c) Tongue

 d) Epididymis



Correct Answer - D
Ans.D. Epididymis
* Stereocilia are found in three places
- Hair cells of inner ear
- Epididymis
- Ductus deferens.
169. Stereocilia are present in?
 a) Taste buds

 b) Hair cells

 c) Retina

 d) Nose



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Hair cells.
[Ref Ganong 25th/e p.202]
Hair cells have a common structure.
The tallest hair cell is called as Kinocilium and the progressively
shorter hair cells are called as Stereocilia.
These hair cells are connected together by tip links which has
mechanically sensitive cation channels.
170. CSF pressure is increased in all except -
 a) Forced inspiration

 b) Coughing

 c) Valsalva manoeuvre

 d) Crying



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Forced inspiration.
[Ref Essential of medical physiology p. 950]
Events like coughing, valsalva manoeuvre, and crying increase the
pressure by decreasing absorption.
Compression of IJV (internal jugular vein) also raises the CSF
pressure.
171. CSF is present in which space?
 a) Central canal of spinal cord

 b) Ventricles of brain

 c) Subarachnoid space

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. All of the above.
[Ref Ganong 24th/e p.603; Principles of medical physiology p. 293]
* Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) is a clear, colorless, almost protein free
filtrate (transduate) of blood.
* It is present,
  - Around the brain (in subarachnoid space) and inside the brain (in
its ventricles).
  - Around the spinal cord (in subarachnoid space) and inside the
spinal cord (in its central canal).
172. Function of Ghrelin?
 a) Stimulate water absorption

 b) Increase appatite

 c) Regulation of temperature

 d) Stimulate lipogenesis



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Increase appatite
 [Ref Clinical endocrinology p.48; Ganong 24th/e p.487]
* Ghrelin is a peptide secreted by oxyntic cells in gastric fundus that
are characterized by round, compact, electron-dense secretory
granules.
* Ghrelin promotes food intake, i.e., stimulate appetite (orexigenic).
* Increases with anorexia.
* In human, ghrelin induces lipolysis.
* Ghrelin is released from the stomach in fasting state.
  - Increases hunger by inhibiting the ventromedial hypothalamus
(satiety center).
  - Stimulates GH secretions.
173. Location of visual cortex?
 a) Precentral gyrus

 b) Postcentral gyrus

 c) Sylvian fissure

 d) Calcarine sulcus



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Calcarine sulcus
[Ref Principles of medical physiology p.531]
The occipital lobe is the visual processing center of brain containing
most of the anatomical region of visual cortex.
Primary visual area is brodmann area 17 (also called VI) on medial
side of occipital lobe in calcarine sulcus.
It is also called as striate area or striate cortex because it can be
identified by a large stripe of myelin, the stria of gennari.
174. Parvocellular pathway for vision is
     concerned with?
 a) Fine details of object

 b) Movements of object

 c) Flickering features

 d) Depth of vision



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Fine details of object
[Ref Ganong 24th/e p.190]
Parvocellular pathway (arises from layer 3, 4, 5, 6 of LGB).
Axons from parvocellular terminate in layer 4 of the visual cortex.
Parvocellular pathway carries signals for color vision, texture, shape
and finer details.
175. Sweat glands are supplied by all except?
 a) Cholinergic neurons

 b) Sympathetic neurons

 c) Adrenergic neurons

 d) C-fibers



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Adrenergic neurons
[Ref Understanding of medical physiology p. 786]
Nerve supply of sweat gland is unique in that it is sympathetic but
cholinergic (most other sympathetic sites are noradrenergic).
Post-ganglionic sympathetic fibers are Type-C fibers.
176. Gustatory pathway involves which
     nerve?
 a) Facial

 b) Glossopharyngeal

 c) Vagus

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. All of the above
[Ref Principles of medical physiology p.87]
Fibers innervating taste buds are branches of cranial nerves, i.e.,
branches of facial, glassopharyngeal, and vagus nerves.
The taste buds in the anterior two-thirds of the tongue are innervated
by lingual branches of the facial nerve.
The taste buds in the posterior third of the tongue are innervated by
glossopharyngeal nerve.
Taste receptors in the pharyngeal part of tongue and on the hard
palate, soft palate, and epiglottis are innervated by fibers of the
vagus nerve.
177. Function of cerebellum?
 a) Regulation of tone

 b) Coordination of eye movement

 c) Planning & initiation of movement

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. All of the above
Functions of the cerebellum:
Regulation of tone, posture and equilibrium.
Smoothening and coordination of voluntary movements. The most
important function and the best known function of cerebellum is
coordination of movements.
Coordination of eye movements
Planning and initiation of movements
Learning of frequently performed voluntary movements.
Timing and comparison:
The cerebellum is believed to be a timing device that times the
duration of agonistic muscle activity and latency of antagonistic
activity, So that any movement is halted at the correct point.
178. Which of the following is not a
     metabotropic receptor for serotonin?
 a) 5HT,A

 b) 5HT,13

 c) 5HT2A


 d) 5HT3



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. 5HT3
[Ref: Ganong32 p. 139; Principles of medical physiology p.786]
Metabotropic receptors:
Are G-protein coupled receptors which act through second
messenger.
Serotonin included:
With the exception of the 5-HT3 receptor, a ligand gated ion
channel, all other 5-HT receptors.
179. Two point discrimination is mainly a
     function of which touch receptors?
 a) Merkel's disc

 b) Ruffini's end organ

 c) Paccinian corpuscle

 d) Meissner's corpuscle



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Merkel's disc
[Ref Principles of medical physiology p. 647] Tactile (touch)
receptors
For touch (superfical touch):-
Meissner's corpuscle (detect texture of surface, i.e. rough or
smooth), Merkel's disc (detect two point discrimination).
180. Which of the following defines vital
     capacity?
 a) Air in lung after normal expiration

 b) Maximum air that can be expirated after normal inspiration

 c) Maximum air that can be expirated after maximum inspiration

 d) Maximum air in lung after end of maximal inspiration



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Maximum air that can be expirated after maximum
inspiration
Vital capacity (VC):
4700 ml.
Amount of air that can be exhaled with maximum effort after
maximum inspiration (ERV+TV+IRV).
Used to assess strength of thoracic muscles as well as pulmonary
function.
181. Functional residual capacity in normal
     adult is?
 a) 500 ml

 b) 1200 ml

 c) 2400 ml

 d) 3200 ml



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. 2400 ml
[Ref: Ganong 24th/e p.629-631]
Volume of air in the lungs at the end of a normal expiration.
In other words, FRC = ERV + RV.
About 2400 ml.
182. What is maximum voluntary ventilation?
 a) Amount of air expired in one munute at rest

 b) Maximum amount of air that can be inspired and expired in one
    minute

 c) Maximum amount of air that can be inspired per breath

 d) Maximum amount of air remaining in lung after forced expiration



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Maximum amount of air that can be inspired and
expired in one minute
[Ref Guyton 12th/e p. 472, 473; Ganong 24th/e p. 633]
Maximum voluntary ventilation (MVV):
It is the maximum amount of air that can be moved into and out of
the lungs in 1 minute by voluntary effort.
About 125-170 L/min.
183. True about Carboxyhemoglobin?
 a) Take up 02 very quickly

 b) Causes histotoxic hypoxia

 c) Causes left shift of Hb-02 dissociation curve


 d) All are true



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Causes left shift of Hb-02 dissociation curve
[Ref Understanding of medical physiology p.173].
COHb cannot take up 02; liberates CO very slowly and shifts
dissociation curve of remaining HbO, to left, decreasing the amount
of 02 released.
CO poisoning causes anemic hypoxia because the amount of Hb
that can carry O2, is reduced but the total Hb amount of blood is
unaffected by CO.
184. What is the difference between Hb-0
     dissociation curve and Hb-CO curve?
 a) CO shifts the curve to left

 b) CO has more affinity to Hb

 c) Co-Hb curve is similar to 02-Hb curve


 d) All are true



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. All are true
[Ref Understandings of medical physiology p. 786]
COHb cannot take up 02; liberates CO very slowly and shifts
dissociation curve of remaining Hb02 to left, decreasing the amount
of O2, released.
The affinity of Hb for CO is 200-250 times its affinity for 02.
So CO-Hb dissociation curve is almost identical to 02 Hb
dissociation curve except that partial pressure are at a level of
1/250.
185. Not true about Bohr effect?
 a) Decrease affinity of 02 by increase PCO,

 b) Left shift of Hb-02 dissociation curve


 c) It is due to H*

 d) All are true



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Left shift of Hb-02 dissociation curve
[Ref Ganong 24th/e p.644, Understanding of medical physiology
p.789]
Bohr effect:
Increase in PCO2 decreases the 02 affinity to hemoglobin and shifts
the oxygen dissociation curve to right; it is called Bohr effect.
The effect of raised PCO2 is mediated by increase in hydrogen ion
concentration.
Hydrogen ions shift the curve by binding with hemoglobin.
Deoxygenated hemoglobin (Deoxyhemoglobin) binds II' more
actively than does oxygentated hemoglobin (oxyhemoglobin).
Ions bind to deoxyhemoglobin and reduce the accessibility of
oxygen to haem groups.
That is why in the presence of more hydrogen ions, less oxygen can
combines with hemoglobin at a given P02 and the oxygen
dissociation curve shifts rightward.
186. Which of the following explains uptake of
     0, in fetal circulation ?
 a) Bohr's effect

 b) Halden's effect

 c) Higher affinity of HbF for 0,

 d) None of the above



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Higher affinity of HbF for 0,
[Ref Smith's anaesthesia 3rdle p. 77]
Fetal hemoglobin's greater affinity for oxygen improves oxygen
uptake at the placenta.
A greater affinity for oxygen is an advantage for uptake at the
placenta.
187. Which of the following explains delivery
     of 02 in fetal circulation?
 a) Bohr's effect

 b) Halden's effect

 c) Higher affinity of HbF for 02

 d) None of the above



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Bohr's effect
Uptake of 0, at placenta → Due to high affinity of HbF for 02
Delivery of 02 at tissue level → Due to Bohr effect.
188. True of 02-Hb dissociation curve?
a) Straight line curve

b) 100% saturated at P02 of 100 mmHg


c) Cooperative binding

d) Hb molecule can carry 6 molecules of 0,



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Cooperative binding
Molecular basis:
"Due to phenomenon "Cooperative binding of Oxygen to
hemoglobin".
Steps involved:
Hemoglobin, a tetramer
Four O2 molecules binds 1 Hb molecule.
1st O2 molecule bonds with greatest difficulty.
Increases affinity to next O2 molecule.
189. Which increases affinity of hemoglobin
     for 0,-
a) Acidosis

b) Hyperthermia

c) High pH

d) High PCO2



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. High pH
Conditions associated with increased affinity of hemoglobin for
oxygen:
High pH.
Decreased H+ ion concentration (alkalosis).
Reduced PCO2
Reduced body temperature.
Reduced 2,3-bisphosphoglycerate (2,3 -BPG)/2,3-
diphosphoglycerate (DPG)
Fetal hemoglobin.
CO poisoning.
190. In comparison to hemoglobin, effect of
     myoglobin on Bohr effect?
 a) Increased

 b) Decreased

 c) Same

 d) No Bohr effect



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. No Bohr effect
[Ref Principles of medical physiology p. 711]
Myoglobin:
Single polypeptide chain.
Human myoglobin contains 152 amino acids with a molecular weight
of 17,500.
Heme is attached to 92"d histidin residue.
One molecule of myoglobin can combine with one molecule of
oxygen.
Myoglobin has higher affinity to oxygen than that of Hb.
Myoglobin has high oxygen affinity while Bohr effect, cooperative
effect and 2, 3-diphosphoglycerate effect can absent.
191. Function of chloride shift in RBCs?
 a) Right shift of Hb-O, curve

 b) Left shift of Hb-02 curve


 c) Transport of CO2

 d) Diffusion of 02 in alveoli



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Transport of CO2
[Ref Ganong 24th/e p.644; Principles of medical physiology p. 819]
Transport of CO2:
* Carbon dioxide is transported in blood as plasma bicarbonate.
* Red blood cells (RBCs) play a major role in the mechanism
because RBCs contain the enzyme carbonic anhydrase that
catalyzes the reaction CO2 + H20 = HCO3 + H.
* Hence when CO2 diffuses into the RBC, it reacts chemically with
water to generate HCO3.
* The H+ ions are mopped up by hemoglobin, which is an excellent
buffer.
* This enables the reaction to proceed in the forward direction.
* The HCO3- ions generated diffuse out into the plasma in exchange
for Cl ions that diffuse into RBCs simultaneously.
* The movement of chloride ions into RBC is called Chloride shift.
  - The above events results in an increase in total number ions
inside the RBC, which increases its osmolarity.
  - As a result, water enters the RBC through osmosis.
192. Closing volume is related to which of the
     following?
 a) Tidal volume

 b) Residual volume

 c) Vital capacity

 d) None



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Residual volume
[Ref Principles of medical physiology p. 240, 241]
The closing volume is the point at which dynamic compression of the
airways begins, especially during forced expiration.
Lower (dependent) parts of the lungs has lesser transmural
pressure, therefore they begin to close early.
Therefore, closing volume is the lung volume above residual volume
at which airway in the lower, dependent parts of the lungs begin to
close off.
Closing capacity is the lung volume (including residual volume) at
which airways in the lower, dependent parts of the lungs begin to
close off, i.e., Closing capacity = closing volume + residual volume.
Closing capacity and volume are tested for small airway function.
Critical closing volume is the minimum volume and pressure of gas
necessary to prevent small airway collapse. It is somewhat near
residual volume.
193. Central chemoreceptors are not
     stimulated by?
 a) T PCO2


 b) T El' in CSF

 c) Hypoxia

 d) All stimulate



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Hypoxia
[Ref Ganong 25th/e p. 658]
Central chemoreceptors:
Located in a chemosensitive area on the ventral surface of the
medulla near the exit of the ninth and tenth cranial nerves.
The primary stimulus for the central chemoreceptors is an increase
in the hydrogen ion concentration.
Stimulation of central chemoreceptors by increased hydrogen ion
concentration leads to excitation of the respiratory neurons, thereby
producing an increase in the rate and depth of respiration.
Central chemoreceptors are directly stimulated by an increase in H*
concentration in CSF and brain inerstitial tissue, which is brought
about by change in arterial PCO2 (PaCO2).
Not stimulated by hypoxia; rather like any other cells, they are
depressed by hypoxia.
194. Chemical regulation of respiration is not
     affected by?
 a) P02


 b) PCO2

 c) pH

 d) Mean BP



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Mean BP
[Ref Principles of medical physiology; Ganong 24th/e p.662-663]
Chemical Regulation
Central chemoreceptors: TFP Concentration in CSF (1, pH of CSF);
T PCO, of blood.
Peripheral chemoreceptors: LP02, TPACO2, acidosis (4 pH)
195. True about high altitude acclimatization?
 a) Left shift 0102- Hb curve

 b) Decreased RBC count

 c) Hypoventilation

 d) Increased erythropoietin



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Increased erythropoietin
[Ref Ganong 24th/e p. 650, 651 & 23'/e p. 617-619; Guyton 12i p.
529, 530]
Acclimatization:
Importal compensatory mechanisms at high altitude are :-
Hyperventilation:- Causes CO2 washout, .1., PCO2 and respiratory
alkalosis.
Increased 2, 3 DPG:- Rightward shift of 02-Hb dissociation curve.
Polycythemia and increased Hb:- Due to increased erythropoietin
release which causes absolute polycythemia with increased red cell
mass.
Others:- Increased renal excretion of alkali (HCO3-), increased
tissue vascularity, increased oxidative metabolism, Increased
diffusion capacity of lung, increased myoglobin.
196. Respiratory exchange of gases is strated
     from?
 a) Branchi

 b) Alveoli

 c) Bronchiole

 d) Tissue level



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Alveoli
[Ref Ganong 25th/e p.639-640]
External respiration:
It consists of exchange of gases (02 and CO2) in the alveoli.
There is diffusion of 02 from alveolar air into pulmonary capillary
blood and diffusion of CO2 into opposite direction.
197. Distending capacity of lung is maximum
     at?
 a) Apex

 b) Base

 c) Mid region

 d) Posterior lobe



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Apex
[Ref Understandings of medical physiology p.791]
"The air spaces at the apices of the lungs tend to be relatively
distended, due to weight of the lungs effectively dragging itself
downwards, putting traction on the upper part of the lung and
stretching the apical air spaces open."
198. Action potential in cardiac muscles is
     due to which ions?
 a) K*

 b) Na*

 c) Ca'

 d) CI?



Correct Answer - A:B:C
Ans. b > a & c
Na+, K+ and Ca+, all are involved in full cycle of action potential in
cardiac muscle.
But, the main phase (phase 0 or depolarization) is due to Na+ ions.
Phase 0 (phase of rapid depolarization) → opening of fast sodium
channels with Na* influx.
Phase 1 (initial phase of rapid repolarization) -4 closure of fast
sodium channels.
Phase 2 (plateu phase) → opening of voltage gated slow Ca**
channels with calcium influx.
Phase 3 (final repolarization) → opening of K* channels with efflux.
Phase 4 -4 Resting membrane potential.
199. Heart sound occuring just before closure
     of AV?
 a) S1

 b) S2

 c) S3

 d) S4



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. S4
[Ref CECIL p.212]
S4 occurs just before 1st heart sound (1st heart sound is due to
closure of AV valve, i.e. mitral & tricuspid valve).
200. Baroreceptors are related to which
     vessels?
 a) Internal carotid artery

 b) External carotid artery

 c) Subclavian artery

 d) Brachiocephalic trunk



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Internal carotid artery
[Ref Ganong 24thle p.590, 591; Principles of medical physiology
p.791]
Baroreceptors are mechanoreceptors that are located in the
adventia of carotid artery and aorta, at specialized locations called
sinuses.
201. Effect of positive G?
 a) Increased cerebral arterial pressure

 b) Increased venous return

 c) Decreased cardiac output

 d) Increased pressure in lower limb



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Decreased cardiac output
[Ref Ganong 25thie p.576, 24th le p.607-608, Principles of medical
physiology p.632]
Effects of positive G:
Throwing of blood in the lower part
Increased lower limb venous pressure
Decreased cerebral arterial pressure
Decreased, venous return
Decreased, cardiac output
Gray-out and Black-out.
202. Which of the following cause increase in
     pulmonary arterial pressure?
 a) Histamine

 b) Hypoxia

 c) ANP

 d) PGI2



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Hypoxia
[Ref Ganong 24th/e p.637]
Hypoxia causes vasoconstriction in pulmonary blood vessels
causing increase in pulmonary arterial pressure.
Effect of various stimulations on pulmonary vessels:
Vasoconstriction:
alpha-adrenergic
Thromboxane-A2
Angiotensin II
LTC4, LTD4
Endothelins
Hypoxia
Hypercapnia
203. Most important cerebral vasodilator?
 a) H+

 b) Na+

 c) Cal+

 d) None



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. H+
[Ref R.K. Marya 3rdie p. 156]
The main metabolic factor responsible for the vasodilatation
associated with cerebral activity is the CO2 produced by the
activated neurons.
Increase in blood PCO2 also produces cerebral vasodilatation.
The vasodilatory effect of CO2 is indirect and is mediated by
formation of local H+ which has a direct vasodilatory effect on
cerebral blood vessels.
A fall in blood PO ,produces cerebral vasodilatation and an increase
in blood PO ,produces cerebral vasoconstriction.
204. Renin secretion is decreased by?
 a) Sympathetic stimulation

 b) Prostacycline [PGI2]

 c) Nacl in distal tubules

 d) Hypotension



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Nacl in distal tubules
[Ref Ganong 241th le p.674, 670]
Principal regulators of renin secretion:
The juxtaglomerular cells themselves are the sensors of the afferent
arteriolar pressure. Lowered pressure stimulate renin release
Increased NaC1 in distal tubules is sensed by macula densa and the
signal is transmitted to JG cells.
This results in decreased Renin release.
Opposite occurs when decreased NaC1 is delivered in distal tubule,
i.e., increased renin release.
Adenosine is probably the mediator of signal.
The JG cells are innervated by sympathetic fibers. They release
renin in response to sympathetic discharge, and by circulating
catecholamines.
Prostacycline (PGI2) stimulates renin secretion through a direct
action.
205. True about function of distal convoluted
     tubule?
 a) Reabsorbe Na* by Nal(+2c1- channel

 b) Reabsorbe IC' by Nei(' channel

 c) Water reabsorption by ADH

 d) All are correct



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Water reabsorption by ADH
Over-all impact of reabsorption in early distal tubule is to dilute urine
by removing solutes.
Late segment of distal tubule is functionally similar to cortical
collecting duct.
Principal (P) cells reabsorb sodium & water from lumen (By ADH &
secrete potassium into lumen.
Intercalated (I) cells reabsorb potassium & secrete hydrogen into
lumen.
Cl- is reabsorbed into late distal tubule.
206. Function of Lacis cells in nephron?
 a) H+secretion

 b) Na+reabsorption

 c) Renin secretion

 d) Regulation of vasoconstriction / vasodilatation of arterioles



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Regulation of vasoconstriction / vasodilatation of
arterioles
[Ref Principles of medical physiology p.412]
Juxtaglomerular/Extraglomerular mesangial cells (Lacis cells)
forming connection via actin and microtubules which allow for
selective vasoconstriction/vasodilation of the renal afferent and
efferent arterioles with mesangial cell contraction.
Note: Lacis cells also contain some renin.
But Renin is mainly secreted by juxtaglomerular cells.
207. Plasma inulin of a person is 4 mg/ml and
     urine flow rate is 20 ml/min. What will be
     GFR if urine inulin is 50 mg/ml?
 a) 125 ml/min

 b) 250 ml/min

 c) 500 ml/min

 d) 1000 ml/min



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. 250 ml/min
[Ref Ganong 23rd le p.678, 679]
GFR – Urine inulin x Urine flow
GFR =– 250 ml/min.
208. True about aquaporins are all except ?
 a) Protein

 b) Aquaporin-1 in PCT

 c) Aquaporin-2 in loop of Henle

 d) Aquaporin-2 in CD



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Aquaporin-2 in loop of Henle
[Ref Ganong 24thie p.683-690]
Aquaporins are protein channels which help in rapid diffusion of
water
Proximal tubles and thin descending limb of loop of Henle →
aquaporin - 1, which is independent of ADH.
Late distal tubule and collecting duct → aquaporin - 2, dependent on
ADH.
209.        Maximum fat absorption in GI tract
                      occurs in?
 a) Duodenum

 b) Jejunum

 c) Ileum

 d) Calcium



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Jejunum
After fat digestion, fatty acids and monoglycerides are absorbed in
small intestine especially in the jejunum and some amount also in
ileum.
In side the enterocyte, fatty acids and monoglycerides again form
triglycerides.
These triglycerides are incorporated into chylomicrons and
transported to lymphatics and from there to blood vessels.
210. If the ileum is excised, what will increase
     in stool?
 a) Bile salts

 b) Bile acids

 c) Iron

 d) Calcium



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Bile salts
Bile (Major constituent bile salts) is absorbed in terminal ileum.
Iron and calcium are absorbed in duodenum.
211.           Which of the following acts as
                "Gatekeeper" in the GIT?
 a) Na+-amino acid cotransporter

 b) Na+ K+ ATPass

 c) Calcium channel

 d) Ne-glucose cotransporter



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Calcium channel
[Ref www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov]
Epithelial calcium channels (E CaCs) act as 'gatekeeper' for
transepithelial Ca" transport.
Prime target for hormonal control of active Ca(2+) flux from the urine
space or intestinal lumen to the blood compartment.
This review covers the distinctive properties of these highly Ca(2+)-
selective channels and highlights the implications for our
understanding of the process of transepithelial Ca(2+) transport.
212. True about basic rhythm of GIT?
 a) Fluctuate between -65 and -40 mV

 b) Initiated by zymogen cells

 c) Pacemaker cells are present in proximal stomach

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Fluctuate between -65 and -40 mV
[Ref Principles of medical physiology p.915]
The smooth muscle cells of gastrointestinal tract has spontaneous
rhythmic fluctuations in membrane potential between about -65 and
-45 mV.
This is called basic electrical rhythm (BER).
This BER is initiated by pacemaker cells called intersititial cells of
Cajal.
213. Daily fecal urobilinogen excretion in
     healthy adults?
 a) 20-40 gm

 b) 40-280 gm

 c) 20-40 mg

 d) 40-280 mg



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. 40-280 mg
[Ref: Principles of medical physiology p.212]
The normal daily excretion of urobilinogen in the feces ranges from
40 to 280 mg, averaging 150 mg.
A total daily excretion of 140 mg of urobilinogen would represent the
catabolism of 3.99 grams of hemoglobin.
214. Maximum daily degradation of
     hemoglobin in normal adults?
 a) 2 gm

 b) 4 gm

 c) 6 gm

 d) 8 gm



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. 8 gm
A total daily excretion of 140 mg of urobilinogen would represent the
catabolism of 3.99 grams of hemoglobin.
Normal maximum urobilinogen in feces is 280 mg, i.e. 8 grams of
hemoglobin catabolism.
215. cAMP activates?
 a) Protein kinase 'A'

 b) Protein kinase 'C'

 c) Nuclear transcription

 d) Phospholipare



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Protein kinase 'A'
Hormones acting through adenylyl cyclase (AC):
Corticotropin releasing hormone (CRH), FSH, LH, TSH, ACTH
(corticotropin), ADH, Vasopressin (V2 receptors), Parathormone,
Catecholamine) e.g., adrenaline (most actions), Glucagon, hCG,
Calcitonin, Somatostatin, acetylcholine (M2), Dopamine (1),
Angiotensin II (epithelial cells), GABA-B, Histamine (H2).
216. Mechanism of action of 5-a reductase?
 a) Breakage of C4C5 double bond

 b) Breakage of C-N bond

 c) Breakage of amide bond

 d) Breakage of N-N bond



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Breakage of C4C5 double bond
5-alpha reductase causes reduction (breakge) of C4-05 double bond
(A4.5) with the help of NADH as a cofactor.
It converts (reduces) testosterone to dihdrotestosterone.
217. Glucose transporter affected in diabetes
     mellitus?
 a) GLUT-2

 b) GLUT-5

 c) GLUT-4

 d) SGLT-2



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. GLUT-4
[Ref Principles of medical physiology p.790]
GLUT-4 is responsible for facilitating the transport of glucose into the
cells in response to insulin.
For this reason, mutation in GLUT-4 have been associated with type
2 diabetes.
The GLUT-4 gene is located on short arm of chromosome 17
(17p13).
218. Gene for insulin responsive glucose
     transporter is located on chromosome?
 a) 7

 b) 21

 c) 17

 d) 13



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. 17
[Ref Principles of medical physiology p.790]
GLUT-4 is responsible for facilitating the transport of glucose into the
cells in response to insulin.
For this reason, mutation in GLUT-4 have been associated with type
2 diabetes.
The GLUT-4 gene is located on short arm of chromosome 17
(17p13).
219. True about ACTH and cortisol
     [corticosteroid] secretion?
 a) Maximum secretion in the evening

 b) ACTH has negative feed-back control

 c) ACTH has major effect on mineralocorticoid secretion

 d) ACTH is derived from POMC



Correct Answer - B:D
Ans. B & D. ACTH has negative feed-back control (D) ACTH is
derived from POMC
 [Ref Understandings of medical physiology p.539]
ACTH is derived from precursor molecule pro-opiomelanocortin
(POMC).
ACTH stimulates the adrenal cortex to increase the synthesis and
release of glucocorticoids. At normal physiological concentration, the
effect of ACTH on secretion of mineralocorticoid (aldosterone) and
androgen is minimal. However, at higher concentration synthesis
and release of these hormone can also increase.
The secretion of ACTH is subjected to negative feedback (inhibition)
by glucocorticoids.
ACTH secretion shows diurnal (circadian) rhythm with minimum
secretion at evening and maximum secretion at early morning.
220. Secretion of cortisol is highest at?
 a) Mid-night

 b) Early morning

 c) Afternoon

 d) Evening



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Early morning
[Ref Textbook of clinical endocrinology p. 78]
The secretion of ACTH and consequently that of cortisol follows a
circadian rhythm due to hypothalamic (Suprachiasmatic nucleus)
control.
ACTH secretion is minimum during night and maximum early in the
morning (6-8 am).
221. All are true regarding intracellular
     receptors, except?
 a) Act by regulating gene expression

 b) Fastest acting receptors

 c) Glucocorticoid receptors

 d) DNA contains hormone responsive elements



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Fastest acting receptors
[Ref Ganong 24th le p.406; Harper 28th/e p.4281]
This is slowest acting tranduction mechanism because protein
synthesis takes some time.
222. Hormone which affects IC* ion
     concentration?
 a) GH

 b) Thyroxine

 c) Insulin

 d) Estrogen



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Insulin
[Ref Guyton Ilth/e p.710]
Insulin lowers serum IC' concentration i.e., causes hypokalemia. The
hypokalemic action of insulin is due to stimulation of K+ intake by
the cells mainly in muscle and adipose tissue. Insulin increases the
activity of Na+ - K. ATPase in cell membrane, so that more K+ is
pumped into cells.
223. Tissue factor activates?
 a) Intrinsic pathway

 b) Contact pathway

 c) In vitro pathway

 d) In vivo pathway



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. In vivo pathway
[Ref Ganong 23thie p.5.31-53.5]
Blood coagulation pathways are divided into:-
Intrinsic pathway (contact pathway):
It is largely an 'in vitro' pathway and is activated when factor XII
(Hageman factor or contact factor) comes in contact with negatively
charged surface, e.g. glass, kaolin etc.
Extrinsic pathway:
It is largely an in vivo pathway is activated by tissue factor
(thromboplastin) at the site of tissue injury.
224. Tisse factor activates?
 a) Preaccelerin

 b) Hageman facter

 c) Labile facter

 d) Prothrombin



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Preaccelerin
[Ref Ganong 23rd le p.531-535]
Preaccelerin (factor VII) is activated to factor Vila by tissue factor.
Tissue factor is the cofactor for both factor VII and Vila.
225.
  Maximum storage of magnesium occurs in
           which part of body?
 a) Adipose tissue

 b) Skeletal muscles

 c) Blood

 d) Bone



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Bone
[Ref Principles of medical physiology p.114]
An adult contains approximately 25 grams of magnesium.
About 60% of the magnesium is present in bone, of which 30% is
exchangeable and functions as a reservoir to stabilize the serum
concentration.
About 20% is present is skeletal muscles, 19% in other soft tissues
and less than 1% in ECF.
226.
Phosphate/phosphorus is present in which
part of cell?
 a) Cell membrane

 b) DNA

 c) RNA

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. All of the above
[Ref Principles of medical physiology /e p.116]
Phosphorus is a component of DNA, RNA, ATP and also the
phospholipids that form all cell membranes.
Nearly every cellular process that uses energy obtains it in the form
of ATP.
Thus, it is an essential element for all living cells and important for
energy utilization in the body.
227. Exercise mediated increase in muscular
     blood flow is mediated by which
     sympathetic fibers
 a) Adrenergic

 b) Noradrenergic

 c) Dopaminergic

 d) Cholinergic



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Cholinergic
An exercise is a form of stress, and like most stresses, is
accompanied by sympathetic overactivity.
Skeletal muscles have both sympathetic noradrenergic
vasoconstrictor fibers and sympathetic cholinergic vasodilator fibers.
Vasoconstrictor nerve fibers act mainly on veins.
Venoconstriction improves venous return and helps in improving
cardiac output.
On the other hand, sympathetic cholinergic fibers, which are unique
to skeletal muscles, bring about arteriolar dilatation and thereby
increase muscle blood flow.
228. Premature ejaculation occurs in which
           phase of sexual cycle?
 a) Excitement phase

 b) Plateu phase

 c) Orgasmic phase

 d) Resolution



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Orgasmic phase
[Ref Oxford textbook of psychiatry p.227]
Orgasm phase:
Premature ejaculation occurs in this phase
Reflexive muscle contraction occurs in pelvis
It is the shortest phase and lasts only a few seconds
229. Erection of penis occurs in which phase
                 of sexual cycle?
 a) Excitement phase

 b) Plateu phase

 c) Orgasmic phase

 d) Resolution



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Excitement phase
Ref Oxford textbook of psychiatry p.227]
Excitement phase
There is increased physiological excitement such as high BP and
heart rate.
There is erection of penis (in males) and swelling of clitoris & labia
minora (in females).
Testes swell, scrotum tightens
There is vaginal lubrication
230. Shortest phase of sexual cycle?
 a) Excitement phase

 b) Plateu phase

 c) Orgasmic phase

 d) Resolution



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Orgasmic phase
[Ref Oxford textbook of psychiatry p.227]
Orgasm phase:
Premature ejaculation occurs in this phase
Reflexive muscle contraction occurs in pelvis
It is the shortest phase and lasts only a few seconds
231. Inhibition of Na* ATPase leads to?
a) Decreased Na* in the cell

b) Increased Ca' in the cell

c) Increased K* in the cell

d) Increased Cl- in the cell



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Increased Ca' in the cell
[Ref Principles of medical physiology 3rdle p. 786]
3Na+/1Ca+ exchanger (Sodium/Calcium exchange pump):
It moves 3Na+ into the cell in exchange one Ca+ going out
232. Hypercoagulable factor is?
 a) Protein C

 b) Protein S

 c) Factor V Leiden

 d) Antithrombin III



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Factor V Leiden
[Ref Textbook of clinical hematology p. 786]
Factor V Leiden is the most common inherited hypercoagulable
state.
Occurs when a specific mutation in a protein that is more resistant to
be turned off, leading to an increased risk of thrombosis.
233. Apnea-hypopnea index is used for?
 a) Emphysema

 b) Asthma

 c) Hyaline membrane disease

 d) Obstructive sleep apnea [OSAI



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Obstructive sleep apnea [OSAI
[Ref Harvard ed] Apnea Hypopnea Index (AHI)
The AHI is the number of apneas or hypopneas recorded during the
study per hour of sleep.
It is generally expressed as the number of events per hour.
Based on the AHI, the severity of OSA is classified as follows:
None/Minimal: AHI < 5 per hour
Mild : AHI 5, but < 15 per hour
Moderate : AHI 15, but < 30 per hour
Severe : AHI 30 per hour.
234. True about heterophilic receptors?
 a) Involved in binding of GH to cell membrane

 b) Bind to same ligand/hormone

 c) Involved in cell adhesion

 d) All are correct



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Involved in cell adhesion
[Ref Textbook of clinical pathology p.1132]
Cell-cell and cell-tissue-interactions occur through following
types of receptors:
Homophilic & heterophilic receptors.
Heterophilic receptors:
These receptors recognize distinct ligands (called adhesion
epitopes) of opposing cell membranes or tissue (called "lock and key
bonds" or "links").
235. Third order neurons of sensations from
     face arise in?
 a) Medulla

 b) Spinal nucleus of trigeminal

 c) Thalamus

 d) Brainstem



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Thalamus
General sensations from the face are carried by trigeminal nerve.
From VPM nucleus of thalamus, third order neurons project to
postcentral gyrus (primary sensory cortex).
236. Somatic efferent of which arise from
     medulla?
 a) Oculomotor

 b) Trochlear

 c) Abducent

 d) Hypoglossal



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Hypoglossal
General somatic efferent (motor) nuclei of Hypoglossal
nucleus:
It lies in medulla and through hypoglossal nerve supplies muscles of
tongue, except palatoglossus.
237. Actin is which type of protein?
 a) Fibrous

 b) Globular

 c) Both

 d) None



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Both
[Ref Principles of medical physiology p.731]
There are two types of actin filaments:
F-actin → Fibrous protein
G-actin → Globular protein
238. NAD+ Acts as a coenzyme for ?

 a) Xanthine oxidase

 b) L-amino acid oxidase

 c) Succinate dehydrogenase

 d) Malate dehydrogenase



Correct Answer - D
Ans. 'D' Malate dehydrogenase
NAD -linked dehydrogenases Pyruvate dehydrogenase, isocitrate
dehydrogenase, malate dehydrogenase, a-ketoglutarate
dehydrogenase, glutamate dehydrogenase, glyceraldehyde-3-P
dehydrogenase, lactate dehy​drogenase, 13-hydroxy acyl CoA
dehydrogenase, glycerol 3-P dehydrogenase (cytoplasmic).
NADP*-linked dehydrogenases Glucose-6-P dehydrogenase, 6-
Phosphogluconate dehydrogenase, 3-ketoacyl reductase, Enoyl
reductase, gulonate dehydrogenase.
FAD-linked dehydrogenases Succinate dehydrogenase, fatty acyl
CoA dehydrogenase, glycerol-3P dehydro​genase (mitochondrial).
239. Enzyme involved in the transfer of
     hydrogen ion is
 a) Hydratase

 b) Oxidase

 c) Peroxidase

 d) Dehydrogenase



Correct Answer - B:D
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Oxidase & 'd' i.e., Dehydrogenase [Ref Harper
30th/e p. 198; Vasudevan 5th/e p. 210]
Enzyme involved in oxidation-reaction are :?
Cause removal of hydrogen
Dehydrogenases : Use NAD or FAD as acceptor
Oxidases : Use oxgen as acceptor, Add oxygen
Oxygenases
240. Which of the following is a
     constitutive enzyme?
 a) Hexokinase

 b) Glucokinase

 c) p galactosidase

 d) Cyclooxygenase-2



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e.,Hexokinase
241. Sequence of complexes in the electron
     transport chain is -
 a) NADH dehydrogenase → Q → Cytochrome bc1 →
    Cytochrome aa3 → O,

 b) NADH dehydrogenase → Q → Cytochrome aa3 →
    Cytochrome bcl→ O,

 c) NADH dehydrogenase → Cytochrome aa3 → Q →
    Cytochrome bcl→ O,

 d) NADH dehydrogenase → Cytochrome bcl → Q →
    Cytochrome aa3 → O,



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., NADH dehydrogenase → Q → Cytochrome bcl →
Cytochrome aa3→ 02
Electron transport chain is made up of 5 stationary complexes and 2
mobile complexes
242. Regarding energy production by the
     electron transport chain, which is true?
 a) The complexes are arranged in a decreasing order of redox
    potential

 b) The complexes are arranged in a decreasing order of ability
    to get reduced

 c) The complexes are arranged in a decreasing order of state
    of oxidation

 d) The complexes are arranged in a decreasing order of
    energy level



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., The complexes are arranged in a decreasing
order of energy level [Ref Essential of biochemistry p. 712]
ETC help in ATP generation
It is explained by Mitchell's chemiosmotic theory. According to this
theory, the complexes are arranged in an increasing order of redox
potential. Redox potential is a measure of ability to get reduced. So
the complexes are arranged in an increasing order of ability to get
reduced. As more a substance is oxidised higher will be the ability to
get reduced, the complexes are arranged in an increasing order of
state of oxidation. As state of oxidation is inversely proportional to
energy level, the complexes are arranged in a decreasing order of
energy level.
So, when electrons move from one complex to another, it means
electrons move from a complex of high energy to a complex of low
energy and that liberates energy. This energy is used for pumping
hydrogen ions from the mitochondrial matrix to just outside the inner
mitochondrial membrane. After hydrogen ions accumulate outside
the inner mitochondrial membrane, hydrogen ions go through FO
Component of ATP synthase.
243. Electron transport chain all are true
     except
 a) Complexes are arranged in an increasing order of redox
    potential;

 b) Mitochondrial Glycerol phosphate dehydrogenase sends its
    electron directly to Q

 c) l0 Hydrogen ions are translocated when NADH enters into
    an electron transport chain

 d) 7 Hydrogen ions are translocated when FADH2 electrons
    get into electron transport chain.



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., 7 Hydrogen ions are translocated when FADH2
electrons get into electron transport chain
NADH electrons get into electron transport chain through complex I.
Energy difference between NADH and Q is in such a way that when
electrons move from complex I to Q, 4 hydrogen ions get
translocated.
Similarly 4 ions get translocated when electrons move from Q to
complex III and 2 1-1' ions get translocated when electrons move
from complex III to IV. So totally 10 1-1+ ions get translocated when
electrons from NADH get into electron transport chain. Complex V or
ATP synthase complex works in such a way that when 10 H* ions go
through F0 component, 1 ATP is generated. So when 10 Hydrogen
ions are translocated, 2.5 ATPs can be generated.
FADH, electrons get into electron transport chain through either
complex II or they directly get into Q, in either case, no energy is
liberated. No hydrogen ions are translocated. When electrons move
from Q to Complex III, 4 hydrogen ions and when electrons move
from III to IV 2 hydrogen ions are translocated. So totally 6 hydrogen
ions are translocated when FADH2 gets into electron transport
chain. ATP synthase complex generates 1 ATP for every 4 hydrogen
ions translocated through F, component. So for 6 hydrogen ions, it is
1.5 ATP
244. Atractiloside act as ?
 a) Uncoupler

 b) Inhibitor of oxidative phosphorylation

 c) Inhibitor of complex I of ETC

 d) Inhibitor of complex III of ETC



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Inhibitor of oxidative phosphorylation
Inhibitors of electron transport chain?
Inhibitors of respiratory chain may be divided into three groups : ?
1. Inhibitors of electron transport chain proper
These inhibitors inhibit the flow of electrons through the respiratory
chain. This occurs at following sites.
Complex I (NADH to CoQ) is inhibited by : - Barbiturates
(amobarbital), Piericidin A (an antibiotic), rotenone (an insectiside),
chlorpromazine (a tranquilizer), and guanethidine (an
ntihypertensive). These inhibitors block the transfer of reducing
equivalents from FeS protein to CoQ.
Complex II is inhibited by : - Carboxin and TTFA inhibit transfer of
electon from FADH2 to CoQ, whereas malanate competitively inhibit
from succinate to complex II. Complex III (Cytochrome b to
cytochrome CI) is inhibited by : - Dimercaprol, antimycin A, BAL
(British antilewisite), Naphthyloquinone. These inhibitors block the
transfer of electrons from cytochrome b to cytochrome
Complex IV (cytochrome C oxidase) is inhibited by : - Carbon
monoxide, CN-, H2S and azide (N3-). These inhibitors block the
transfer of electrons from cytochrome aa3 to molecular oxygen and
therefore can totally arrest cellular respiration.
2. Inhibitors of oxidative phosphorylation
   These compounds directly inhibit phosphorylation of ADP to ATP.
   Oligomycin inhibits Fo component of F0F, ATPase. Atractiloside
   inhibits translocase, a transport protein that transports ADP into
   mitochondria for phosphorylation into ATP.
   3. Uncouples
   As the name suggests, these componds block the coupeling of
   oxidation with phosphorylation. These compounds allow the transfer
   of reducing equivalents in respiratory chain but prevent the
   phosphorylation of ADP to ATP by uncoupling the linkage between
   ETC and phosphorylation. Thus the energy instead of being trapped
   by phosphorylation is dissipated as heat. Uncouplers may be :-
1. Natural :- Thermogenin, thyroxine
2. Synthetic :- 2, 4-dinitrophenol (2, 4-DNP), 2, 4-dinitrocresol (2, 4-
   DNC), and CCCP (chlorocarbonylcyanidephenyl hydrazone).
245. Which of the following is the
     respiratory centre of cell?
 a) Mitochondria

 b) Microsome

 c) Lysosome

 d) Nucleus



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Mitochondria
As mitochondria harbours the electron transport chain. In electron
transport chain, the electrons from NADH and FADH2 are
transferred through the various complexes to finally Oxygen.
Oxygen is then converted to water. This way all fuels get oxidised to
Carbondioxide. In other words in miotochondria, Oxygen is utilised
and Carbon dioxide generation is supported. Hence it is called as
the respiratory centre of the cell.
246. Cellulose is biochemically -
 a) β (1,4) L glucose

 b) ?, (14) D glucose

 c) β(1,4) D glucose

 d) ? (1,4) L glucose



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., β (1,4) L glucose
Cellulose is a component of cell wall.
Cellulose is a structural homopolysaccharide made up of glucose
molecules linked by 13(1,4) linkages.
Humans cannot digest cellulose because human digestive enzymes
cannot break 43(1,4) linkages present in oligosaccharides and
polysaccharides.
This is why vegetarian diet is considered to provide fibre to the diet.
247. D and L isomerism is -
 a) Optical isomerism

 b) Functional isomerism

 c) Epimerism

 d) Enantiomerism



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is d.i.e., Enantiomerism
Enantiomerism is a type of stereoisomerism in which two molecules
have the same molecular formula and the same structural formula
but they differ in spatial orientation with respect to all the carbon
atoms and they are named based on the orientation in the
penultimate carbon atom.
In the penultimate carbon atom, if OH is on the right side, it is D
form, if OH is on the left side, it is L form. The other name for
enantiomerism is Racemism.
248. Which among the following glucose transporter present in beta cells ?
 a) GLUT1

 b) GLUT2

 c) GLUT3

 d) GLUT4



Correct Answer - B
GLUT2 is the glucose transporter present in the betacells and
liver cells.It has a high Km for glucose.Hence entry of glucose is
directly proportional to the glucose level.It is an insul;in independent
transport.

GLUT3 is present in brain and GLUT4 medites insulin dependent
transport of glucose into muscle and adipose tissue.

Ref: Murray R.K., Granner D.K. (2011). Chapter 40. Membranes:
Structure & Function. In D.A. Bender, K.M. Botham, P.A. Weil, P.J.
Kennelly, R.K. Murray, V.W. Rodwell (Eds), Harper's Illustrated
Biochemistry, 29e.
249. All of the following are converted to
     cr-ketoglutarate on catabolism except-
 a) Glutamate

 b) Histidine

 c) Proline

 d) Glycine



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Glycine [Ref Harper 30th/e p. 162, 250/e p. 166,
167]
250. Glucogenic aminoacids give rise to all
     of the following intermediates of citric
     acid cycle except-
 a) Isocitrate

 b) c ketoglutarate

 c) Succinyl CoA

 d) Fumarates



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Isocitrate
251. What is the precursor of proline in
     Krebs cycle?
 a) Oxaloacetate

 b) c ketoglutarate

 c) Succinyl CoA

 d) Fumarates



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., c ketoglutarate [Ref Essentials of Biochemistry p.
232; Harper 29`'/e p.
Proline is an alpha aminoacid with a pyrrolidine ring
It is a non polarimino acid with NH as one of its functional groups
It disrupts a helix
It is a nonessential amino acid and is synthesized from a non-
essential aminoacid glutamate
Glutamate in the presence of y glutamate kinase gets converted to
glutamate 5 phosphate, which in the presence of y glutamate
dehydrogenase gets converted to y glutamate semialdehyde. y
glutamate semialdehyde spontaneously cyclises to form y pyrroline
carboxylate which in the presence of reductase forms proline
252. used in citric acid cycle are all except-
a) NAD

b) FAD

c) NADP

d) GDP



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. NADP
Enzyme                            Reducing equivalentATP
Isocitrate dehydrogenase          1 NADH             2.5
alpha ketoglutarate dehydrogenase 1 NADH             2.5
Succinyl CoA                      ATP/GTP            1
Succinate dehydrogenase           FADH2              1.5
Malate dehydrogenase              NADH               2.5
                                  total              10
253. All of the following steps act as
     sources of energy in citric acid cycle
     except -
 a) Citrate synthase

 b) Isocitrate dehydrogenase

 c) Succinyl Thiokinase

 d) Succinate Dehydrogenase



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e.,Citrate synthase
254. True about glucokinase is -
 a) It is present in all cells

 b) It is a constitutive enzyme

 c) It has a high km

 d) It is inhibited by glucose 6 phosphate



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e.,It has a high km
S.
    Property                    Hexokinase      Glucokinase
No.
                                                Liver and
1    Location                    All cells
                                                Pancreatic (3 cells
2    Affinity                High               Low
3    Km                      Low                High
     Inhibition by glucose 6
4                            Yes                No
     phosphate
                             No (Constitutive   Yes (Inducible
5    Induction by Insulin
                             enzyme)            Enzyme)
255. All of the following are true about
     lactate utilisation in liver except -
 a) Total net number of ATP formed because of cori's cycle is
    6

 b) Cori's cycle shifts the metabolic burden from muscle to liver

 c) Cori's cycle can not be sustained indefinitely because it is
    energetically unfavourable

 d) Cori's cycle is linked to glycogen synthesis in muscle



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Total net number of ATP formed because of coil's
cycle is 6
CORI'S CYCLE
Muscle uses a molecule of glucose through anaerobic glycolysis and
gets 2 ATPs. In this process, glucose becomes two molecules of
lactate. The 2 lactate molecules through circulation reach liver. In
liver, the two molecules of lactate are utilised through
gluconeogenesis to form a glucose molecule at the expense of 6
ATPs. The glucose formed in liver reaches muscle and is utilised for
again anaerobic glycolysis if the muscle is still exercising. In case
muscle is done with exercising, the glucose which reaches the
muscle from liver is used for glycogen synthesis.
256. Which of the following is true about
     effect of insulin and glucagon on
     gluconeogenesis?
 a) Insulin favours the formation of fructose 2,6 bisphosphate

 b) Fructose 2, 6 bisphosphate is an inhibitor of glycolysis

 c) Insulin acts through a kinase

 d) Glucagon stimulates PFK.2 activity of the tandem enzyme



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Insulin favours the formation of fructose 2,6
bisphosphate
Glycolysis and gluconeogenesis are reversal of each other. Hence
the two pathways should be regulated in such a way that when one
pathway is active, the other one has to be inactive. Otherwise they
will end up in futile cycles.
257. Key enzyme of gluconeogenesis are all
     except?
 a) Pyruvate carboxylase

 b) PEP carboxykinase

 c) Pyruvate kinase

 d) Glucose-6-phosphatase



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Pyruvate kinase
Mitochondrial pyruvate carboxylase catalyzes the carboxylation of
Pyruvate to Oxaloacetate, It is an ATP-requiring reaction, Biotin is
the coenzyme.
Phosphoenolpyruvate Carboxykinase: Catalyzes the
decarboxylation and phosphorylation of oxaloacetate to
phosphoenolpyruvate(PEPCK) (Cytosol) using GTP as the
 phosphate donor.
The conversion of glucose-6-phosphate to glucose is catalyzed by
glucose 6-phosphatase
258. In glycogen synthesis the active form
     of glucose used is-
 a) Glucose 6 phosphate

 b) Glucose I phosphate

 c) UDP glucose

 d) UTP glucose



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., UDP glucose
Glycogen synthesis occurs in liver and Skeletal Muscle
UDP glucose is the active form of glucose which gets added to the
growing glycogen
The number of high energy phosphates required for attaching a
glucose molecule to growing glycogen is 3
The rate limiting enzyme of glycogen synthesis is glycogen synthase
Glycogen synthase gets activated by dephosphorylation
Glycogen synthase attaches glucose residues one by one along a
straight chain, linked by a(1,4) linkages. This continues until 11 to 13
residues are attached in a straight chain.
At branch points in glycogen, a(1,6) linkages should be formed.
259. UDP glucose is not used in ?
 a) Uronic acid pathway

 b) Glycogen synthesis

 c) Galactose metabolism

 d) HMP shunt



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., HMP shunt
UDP-glucose is derived from glucose-6-phosphate via glucose-l-
phosphate.
The major fate of UDP-glucose is the synthesis of glycogen.
Other uses of UDP-glucose are -
1. In uronic acid (glucoronic acid) cycle to generate UDP
glucuronate.
2. Galactose metabolism
3. Glycosylation of proteins, lipids and proteoglycans.
260. Neonatal hypoglycaemia which does
     not respond to counter regulatory
     hormone administration is diagnostic of
     -
 a) Her's disease

 b) Cori's disease

 c) Anderson's disease

 d) Von Gierke's disease



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e.,Von Gierke's disease
Glycogen storage disorders presenting with hypoglycaemia are Type
I (Von Gierke's disease), Type III (Cori's disease or Forbe's
disease), Type VI (Her's disease), Type IX (Fanconi Bickel
syndrome)
The only Glycogen storage disorder which presents as
hypoglycaemia not responding to counter regulatory hormone
administration is Von Gierke's disease
Muscle involvement is not a feature of Type I(Von Gierke's disease),
Type IV (Andersoen disease), Type VI (Her's disease), Type IX
(Fanconi Bickel syndrome)
Andersen disease or Type IV is the only glycogen storage disease
which presents with neither hypoglycaemia nor with muscle
involvement. It presents as hepatomegaly and cirrhosis
261. Which of the following is a serine
     protease

 a) Chymotrypsin

 b) Pepsin

 c) Carboxypeptidase

 d) Caspases



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is'a'i.e., Chymotrypsin lRef: Chatterjee 7h/e p. 4j5-361
* The term Protease is used to represent the group of enzymes that
catalyze the cleavage ofpeptide bonds in proteins and peptide
molecules with the participation of water as co-reactant. In
simple words, proteases catalyze the cleavage of peptide
bonds by hydrolysis (addition of water
Serine proteases:-
* These posses a critical serine residue at the active site.
  - Example of serine proteases are trypsin, chymotrypsin, elastase,
and thrombin.
* Serine proteases are inhibited by disopropylphosphofluridate which
binds covalently to serine residue.
  - The active site of serine proteases contain three critical
amino acids serine, histidine and aspartate. These residues
are often referred to as catalytic triad
262. Essential fatty acids are except:
 a) Arachidonic acid

 b) Linoleic acid

 c) Palmitic acid

 d) Linolenic acid



Correct Answer - A
The essential fatty acids are polyunsaturated fatty acids, linoleic
acid (18:26) and linolenic acid (18:33).

Arachidonic acid (20:46) is derived from dietary linoleic acid and is
present primarily in membrane phospholipids.

Important derivatives of linolenic acid are eicosapentaenoic acid
(20:63) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA, 22:63) found in human
milk and brain lipids.Palmitic acid is a common saturated fatty acid.
Arachidonic acid (20C: ro6) is not nutritionally essential because
chain elongase system can convert linoleic acid (l8C: <o6) into
Arachidonic acid (20C: o6). So arachidonic acid is considered as
conditionally essential, because it has to be supplied
in the diet if linoleic acid is not supplemented.
Ref : Botham K.M., Mayes P.A. (2011). Chapter 23. Biosynthesis of
Fatty Acids & Eicosanoids. In D.A. Bender, K.M. Botham, P.A. Weil,
P.J. Kennelly, R.K. Murray, V.W. Rodwell (Eds), Harper's Illustrated
Biochemistry, 29e.
263. Which of the following is a transfatty
     acid?
 a) Oleic acid

 b) Elaidic acid

 c) Stearic acid

 d) Arachidonic acid



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Elaidic acid [Ref Harper 30"/e p. 213]
There are two types of fatty acids :
Saturated
Unsaturated
Cis - trans isomerism is for unsaturated fatty acids.
Stearic acid is a saturated fatty acid (No cis-trans isomerism)
Only important unsaturated trans-fatty acid is Elaidic acid (trans-9-
octadecenoic)
   264. Activators of Acetyl CoA carboxylase
        are all except
    a) Acyl coA

    b) Citrate

    c) Glutamate

    d) Dicarboxylic acid



   Correct Answer - A
   Ans. is 'a' i.e., Acyl CoA [Ref Harper 29thle p. 217, 220]
   Allosteric modulation of acetyl CoA carboxylase
1. Activaters : Citrate (tricarboxylic acid); glutamate (dicarboxylic amino
   acid) & other dicarboxylic acids; ATP
2. Inhibitors : Acyl CoA
265. Arachidonic acid oxidation involves
     how many cycles of beta oxidation?
 a) l0

 b) 20

 c) 9

 d) 8



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., 9
Number of acetyl CoA formed in (3-oxidation of fatty acids = Number
of carbon atoms/2.
Number of cycles of (beta-oxidation required -No of carbon / 2(-1)
Hence arachidonic acid with 20 carbon atoms undergoes p oxidation
to form 10 acetyl CoA by going through (20/2) - 1 cycles i.e., 9
cycles.
266. All are true about beta oxidation of
     fatty acids except -
 a) Carnitine acyl transferase I is the rate limiting enzyme of
    fatty acid oxidation

 b) Carnitine acyl transferase I is stimulated by Acyl CoA

 c) Carnitine Acyl transferase I is stimulated by malonyl CoA

 d) Carnitine Acyl transferase I defect causes a decrease in
    acylcarnitine levels



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Carnitine Acyl transferase I is stimulated by
malonyl CoA
As CATI is the rate limiting enzyme of fatty acid oxidation, its
substrate is acyl CoA. As we know that all enzymes get stimulated
by their substrates, acyl CoA stimulates CATI.
Malonyl CoA is a product of acetyl CoA carboxylase (ACC). ACC is
the rate limiting enzyme of fatty acid synthesis, an anabolic pathway.
So, malonyl CoA is an intermediate of anabolic pathway. Hence it is
a signal of high energy (Anabolism happens only in high energy
status). When the energy is already high, we do not want fatty acids
to be further oxidised. We want fatty acids to be only stored. So,
malonyl CoA, a signal of high energy inhibits CATI.
In short, anything which signals low energy stimulates fatty acid
oxidation (CATI). So, ADP, NAD, FAD, Glucagon , Acyl CoA
stimulate fatty acid oxidation
Anything which signal high energy inhibit fatty acid oxidation. So,
ATP, NADH, FADH2, Insulin and malonyl CoA inhibit fatty acid
oxidation.
Fatty acid oxidation defects present as non ketotic hypoglycaemia,
hyperammonemia, dicarboxylic aciduria. And all fatty acid oxidation
defects also present with increase in acyl carnitine levels. One
exception is CATI defect. In CATI defect, as acyl CoA is not
converted to acyl Carnitine, free carnitine levels are high and acyl
carnitine levels are low.
267. AII are true about beta oxidation of fats
     acids except -
 a) Occurs in mitochondria

 b) Occurs in peroxisome

 c) Results in hydrogen peroxide generation

 d) Fatty acid oxidation defects present with ketosis



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Fatty acid oxidation defects present with ketosis
Fatty acid oxidation defect causes non-ketotic hypoglycemia.
Fatty acid oxidation happens in mitochondria and in peroxisomes.
The difference between mitochondrial oxidation and peroxisomal
oxidation is that in mitochondria, when the 13 carbon atom is
oxidised, the hydrogen atoms are removed. Those hydrogen atoms
are used for reducing NAD and FAD to form NADH and FADH2.
NADH and FADH2 enter into electron transport chain to form ATP.
In peroxisome, the hydrogen atom removed from (3 carbon atom is
used to reduce 02 forming F1202. Only because 11202 is formed in
peroxisome by (beta oxidation the organism is called so)
268. Which of the following is true about
     Beta oxidation of fatty acids?
 a) Stearic acid on oxidation provides 106 ATPs

 b) Odd chain fatty acid oxidation provides only propionyl coA

 c) Fatty acid oxidation defects cause hypoglycemia

 d) Ketone bodies are formed by incomplete oxidation of fatty
    acid during starvation to increase energy production



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Fatty acid oxidation defects cause
hypoglycaemia
Defect in fatty acid oxidation causes hypoglycemia.
About other options
Stearic acid oxidation produces 122 ATPs.
Even chain fatty acids are (3-oxidized to acetyl CoA. Odd chain fatty
acids are also (3-oxidized normally but the last step produces a 3-
carbon propionyl CoA along with an acetyl CoA (instead of 2
molecules acetyl CoA that occurs in even chain fatty acids).
Ketone body formation (ketogenesis) occurs when there is a high
rate of fatty acid oxidation in liver which provides
excessive acetyl CoA, substrate for ketogenesis.
When ketone bodies are formed, as we can't expect the 10 ATPs
which we get from every acetyl CoA through citric acid cycle, the
formula for energetics of incomplete oxidation of fatty acids is :
269. Which of the following is true about
     properties of VLDL/LDL-
 a) In electrophoresis, VLDL migrates more cathodal than LDL

 b) LDL is formed from liver

 c) LDL is formed from Chylomicron

 d) VLDL remnants reach extrahepatic tissues



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., LDL is formed from liver
Lipoprotein electrophoresis of a fasting sample shows three bands -
HDL, VLDL, LDL in that order from anode to cathode.
VLDL is synthesized in liver that contains high triglyceride, ChE,
cholesterol, phospholipid and Apo B-100. (VLDL particles resemble
chylomicrones in composition except that VLDL contains Apo B-100
instead of Apo B-48).
VLDL particles are secreted in the plasma and as with chylomicron,
Apo E and Apo C are transferred from HDL to VLDL. Now VLDL
contains Apo B-100, Apo E and Apo C.
In plasma, triglycerides of VLDL are hydrolysed by same lipoprotein
lipase (see above) and apo C is transferred to HDL and the
remmants are called IDL.
40-60% of IDL is removed by liver via LDL receptor mediated
endocytosis, this process require Apo E which acts as ligand for LDL
receptors.
Remaining IDL is remodeled by hepatic (liver) lipase which
hydrolyzes more triglyceride to form LDL that contains maximum
cholesterol.
70% of LDL is removed by liver via LDL receptor and 30% is utilized
by peripheral tissues as a source of cholesterol.
270. Reverse cholesterol transport - all are
     true except-
 a) Transport of cholesterol from extrahepatic tissues to liver

 b) ATP Binding Cassette Transporter protein is involved in the
    conversion of HDL3 to HDL2

 c) Lecithin Cholesterol Acyl Transferase helps in the
    conversion of Spheroidal HDL to Discoidal HDL

 d) Cholesterol Ester Transfer Protein helps in increasing HDL
    level



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Cholesterol Ester Transfer Protein helps in
increasing HDL level
Reverse Cholesterol Transport is the transport of Cholesterol ester
and phospholipid from extrahepatic tissues to liver.
HDL is released by both liver and intestinal cells.
In both the cases, they are released as discoidal HDL
Apo Al activates Lecithin Cholesterol Acyl Transferase and it
converts discoidal HDL to Spheroidal HDL (HDL3)
HDL3 activates ABC1 (ATP Binding Casette Transporter 1) to collect
cholesterol and phospholipids from extra hepatic tissue membranes.
This way HDL3 size increases and density decreases. Hence it
forms HDL2.
This HDL2 reaches liver to empty its contents into liver.
On the way to liver, if HDL2 encounters IDL, Cholesterol Ester
Transfer Protein (CETP) transfers Choelsterol ester from HDL2 to
IDL, converting IDL to LDL. Hence CETP decreases HDL level and
increases LDL level.
271. Progesterone synthesis requires -
 a) LDL

 b) VLDL

 c) HDL

 d) Chylomicron



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e.,HDL
Granulosa cells use follicular fluid HDL as a source of cholesterol for
the synthesis of progesterone.
Under the influence of LH, corpus luteal cells take up cholesterol
from follicular fluid HDL and convert cholesterol into progesterone.
272. Site of small chain fatty acid
     absorption is -
 a) Ileum

 b) Duodenum

 c) Ascending colon

 d) Rectum



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Ascending colon
Short chain fatty acids (SCFA) are fatty acids with 2 to 6 carbon
atoms. They are the major end-products of the microbial digestion of
carbohydrates in the alimentary canal. These short chain fatty acids,
butyrate particularly is important for colon health because it is the
primary energy source for colonic cells and has anti-carcinogenic as
well as anti-inflammatory properties that are important for keeping
colon cells healthy. Butyrate inhibits the growth and proliferation of
tumor cell lines in vitro, induces differentiation of tumor cells,
producing a phenotype similar to that of the normal mature cell, and
induces apoptosis or programmed cell death of human colorectal
cancer cells
The highest concentrations are observed in the large intestine
(caecum and colon) of all the mammals.
Human caecum and proximal colon have high luminal
concentrations of organic nutrients (non-starch polysaccharides from
plant cell walls, and proteins not absorbed by the small intestine)
which maintain high bacterial growth rates. Against this fermentative
background, antiperistalsis ensures retention and thorough mixing of
faeces in the proximal colon, which is the site of maximal SCFA
production. SCFA absorption is concentration dependent and occurs
most readily in the proximal colon (Includes cecum, ascending colon
and transverse colon).
273. HMG CoA is precursor of all except-
 a) Ubiquinone

 b) Dolichol

 c) Bile pigments

 d) Ketone body



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Bile pigments
3 - Hydroxy 3 methyl glutaryl CoA or HMG CoA is formed from
acetyl CoA.
274. Refsum's disease is due to deficiency of
     which of the following enzyme?
 a) Malonate dehydrogease

 b) Thiophorase

 c) Succinate thiokinase

 d) Phytanic alpha oxidase



Correct Answer - D
D i.e. Phytanic alpha oxidase
Refsum's disease is a rare autosomal recessive disorder caused by
deficiency of phytanic a oxides (Nelson) / a?hydroxylase (Lippincot) /
Phytanoyl CoA hydroxylase (Lehninger) results in accumulation of
phytanic acid due to its decreased a - oxidation (i.e. hydroxnlation at
a carbon by fatty acid a hydroxylase)
275. What is the parameter that is used to
     assess lipid peroxidation?
 a) Malondialdehyde

 b) CRP

 c) hsCRP

 d) Carboxymethyl lysine



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e.,Malondialdehyde
ROS can be produced by either breakage of covalent bond, addition
of electrons to a molecule or removal of hydrogen by other radicals.
They are generally highly reactive species and typically act as
electrophilic species or oxidant agents. The most important radicals
or pro-oxidant molecules involved in disease processes are
superoxide (02-), hydroxyl radical (OH), hydrogen
peroxide (H202) and certain oxides of nitrogen, like nitric oxide (NO)
and peroxynitrite (ONOO-)2
Since it is complex measuring free radicals directly in vivo, it is
necessary to carry out the quantification of cellular components
which can react with these free radicals, such as proteins, DNA and
mainly lipids. Once lipid peroxides are unstable compounds, they
tend to degrade rapidly in a variety of sub products. MDA
(Malondialdehyde) is one of the most known secondary products of
lipid peroxidation, and it can be used as a marker of cell membrane
injury.
MDA is a three-carbon, low-molecular weight aldehyde formed by
cyclization of aldehydes which have unsaturation in a or 13 positions
Several methods have been developed to assess MDA, including
quantitative methods using spectrophotometry or fluorimetric
detection, high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC), gas
chromatography and immunological techniques
Other markers of oxidative stress include conjugated dienes, ethane
and pentane gases, isoprostanes and 4-HNE (4 - hydroxy 2-
nonenal)
276. All are true about ketone bodies except ?
 a) Acetoacetate is primary ketone body

 b) Synthesized in mitochondria

 c) Synthesized in liver

 d) HMG CoA reductase is the rate-limiting enzyme



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., HMG CoA reductase is the rate-limiting enzyme
277. All are features of Abetalipoproteinemia, EXCEPT:
 a) Plasma levels of cholesterol and triglyceride are extremely low

 b) Manifest in early childhood with diarrhea

 c) Progressive pigmented retinopathy seen

 d) Neurological manifestation as ataxia in first decade



Correct Answer - D
Plasma levels of cholesterol and triglyceride are extremely low in
this disorder, and chylomicrons. Abetalipoproteinemia usually
presents in early childhood with diarrhea and failure to thrive.

The neurological manifestations like decreased distal lower
extremity vibratory and proprioceptive sense, dysmetria, ataxia, and
the development of a spastic gait, often by the third or fourth
decade.

Patients also develop a progressive pigmented retinopathy
presenting with decreased night and color vision.

Ref: Harrisons Principles of Internal Medicine, 18th Edition, Page
3153
278. Amino acid in synthesis of
     neurotransmitter
a) Glutamate

b) Proline

c) Cysteine

d) Alanine



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e.,Glutamate
Aminoacid                  Neurotransmitter
Glutamate                  Glutamate & GABA
Glycine                    Glycine
Phenylalanine & TyrosineDopamine, Norepinephrine &Epinephrine
Tryptophan                 Serotonin
279. Maximum buffering capacity of a buffer
     is maximum at pH
 a) Less than pka

 b) More than pka

 c) Equal to pka

 d) Has no relation with pka



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Equal to pka [Ref Harper 30th/e p. 21 & 29'11e p.
20, 21, 18; Vasudevan 6thie p. 22, 23]
Maximal buffering capacity occurs at pH equal to pka of buffer.
Therefore, to work as a best buffer at physiological pH amino acid
should have pka value close to physiological pH (7.4).
Amino acids can have buffering action due to three ionizable groups
:-
a-carboxyl group :- Different amino acids have pka value of a-
carboxyl group between 3.5-4. So, carboxyl group of amino acids
has maximum buffering capacity between pH 3.5-4.
a-amino group :- Different amino acids have pka value of a-amino
group between 8.0-9.0. Thus, a-amino group has maximum
buffering capacity between pH 8.0-9.0.
Special ionizable group (in some amino acids) :- Among special
ionizable group of amino acids, imidazole group of histidine has pka
value 6.5-7.4, which is closest to physiological pH. Hence, histidine
(due to imidazole group) has maximum buffering capacity at
physiologial pH.
280. Essential amino-acid deficiency affect
     nitrogen balance by
 a) Increasing protein degradation

 b) Decreasing protein degradation

 c) Decreasing protein synthesis

 d) Increasing protein synthesis



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Decreasing protein synthesis [Ref Principles of
medical Biochemistry p. 464]
Nitrogen balance is the difference between ingested nitrogen and
excreted nitrogen.
Nitrogen balance = N ingested - N excreted
Because dietary proteins are an important source of nitrogen,
nitrogen balance is an important index of protein and amino acid
metabolism.
In healthy adults, nitrogen balance is zero, i.e. a state of nitrogen
equlibrium exists, where nitrogen intake is equal to nitrogen
excretion.
Negative nitrogen balance (excretion exceeds intake) in dietary
protein deficiency
In adult, even of protein starved, at least 30-40 gm of amino acids
are degraded each day; this amount defines the minimum dietary
requirment. If dietary supply drops below this limit, a negative
nitrogen balance occurs and the body protein is lost. Essential
amino acid deficiency has the same effect because relative
deficiency.
281. Creatinine is formed from :
 a) Arginine

 b) Lysine

 c) Leucine

 d) Histamine



Correct Answer - A
Glycine, arginine and methionine all participate in creatine
biosynthesis
282. Acidic amino acids are -
 a) Asparagine

 b) Arginine

 c) None

 d) Lysine



Correct Answer - A
Proline is a unique amino acid and has an immino group (=NH)
instead of an amino (NH2) group found in other amino acid.
Methionine & Cysteine are sulfur containing aminoacids.
The property of photochromicity (i.e. absorbance of ultraviolet light at
250-290nm esp 280nm) is seen with aromatic amino acid
(tryptophan > tyrosine > phenylalanine).
Hydrophobic (non polar) aminoacids have no charge on their R
group or side chain. Aliphatic (eg methyl, methylene, thioether &
imino) side chains and aromatic side chains are nonpolar. So methyl
(CH3) side chain of alanine; propyl (C3H7) side chain of valine; butyl
(C4H9) side chain of leuicine & isoleucine; thioether side chain of
methionine; and imino group/ pyrrolidine containing side chain of
proline are nonpolar.
Methyl (CH3) side chain of alanine is nonpolar. Serine, threonine,
tyrosine containing hydroxyl group and cysteine containing sulfhydryl
group, are polar aminoacids with neutral/uncharged/nonionic side
chain. Positively charged basic amino (NH 3+)group side chain of
histidine, arginine and lysine ; and negatively acidic carboxyl (COO-)
side chain of aspartic acid and glutamic acid is polar.
283. Function of tyrosinase is
 a) Synthesis of norepinephrine

 b) Synthesis of dopamine

 c) Synthesis of melanin

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Synthesis of melanin [Ref Harper 29th/e p. 288-
290]
Note- Tyrosine hydroxylase and tyrosinase catalyzes the conversion
of tyrosine to Dopa, but both are defferent enzymes. Tyrosine
hydroxylase is involved in catecholamines synthesis in adrenal
medulla and sympathetic ganglia, whereas tyrosinase is involved in
melanin synthesis in melanoblasts of skin.
284. Cofactor for dopamine hydroxylase ?
a) Fe

b) Mg

c) Mn

d) Cu



Correct Answer - D
Dopamine 8-hydroxylase is a 'copper' containing monooxygenase
that requires ascorbic acid and molecular oxygen.
It catalyzes the formation of norepinephrine.
285. Rate limiting enzyme in catecholamine
     synthesis?
 a) Dopa decarboxylase

 b) N-methyltransferase

 c) Dopamine hydroxylase

 d) Tyrosine hydroxylase



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Tyrosine hydroxylase
286. Enzyme which acts on aspartate
a) Serum Glutamate Pyruvate Transaminase (SGPT)

b) Serum Glutamate Oxaloacetate Transaminase (SGOT)

c) Ornithine transcarbmaylase (OTC)

d) Argininosuccinate lyase (ASL)



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Serum Glutamate Oxaloacetate Transaminase
(SGOT)
SGPT catalayses the transamination between Alanine and a
Ketoglutarate.
Alanine + a Ketoglutarate Pyruvate + Glutamate
It is in no way related to aspartate.
SGOT catalyses the transamination between Aspartate and a
Ketoglutarate
287. True about glutamate dehydrogenase is
     A/E
 a) Liver mitochondrial enzyme

 b) Use both NAD* or NADP+ coenzyme

 c) Inhibited by ADP & activated by GTP

 d) Reversible oxidative deamination



Correct Answer - C
C i.e. Inhibited by ADP & activated by GTP
During first few days of fasting, there is rapid breakdown of muscle
protein, providing aminoacids (alanine & glutamine mainly) that are
used by liver for gluconeognesisQ.
In the fasting state, the output of alanine from skeleton muscle is in
far excess of its concentration in the muscle proteins that are being
catabolized. Because it is also formed by transamination of pyruvate
produced by glycolysis of muscle glycogen. Alanine is exported to
the liver, where it is transaminated back to pyruvate, which serves
as a substrate for gluconeogenesisQ.
288. Allosteric stimulator of glutamate
     dehydrogenase is
 a) ATP

 b) GTP

 c) Palmitoyl CoA

 d) Leucine



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e.,Leucine
GLDH is allosterically stimulated by ADP, GDP, leucine, valine and
isoleucine.
It is inhibited by ATP, GTP, palmitoyl CoA and Zinc.
289. Which of the following is a biologically
     important tripeptide?
 a) Thyrotropin releasing hormone

 b) Thyroid stimulating hormone

 c) Gonadotropin releasing hormone

 d) Follicle Stimulating hormone



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Thyrotropin releasing hormone
Tripeptide is a peptide with 3 aminoacids and 2 peptide linkages.
Biologically important tripeptides include glutathione, TRH
(Thyrotropin Releasing Hormone) and melanostatin.
TSH is a glycoprotein not a peptide. It is made up of two subunits - a
and (I a subunit is a polypeptide with about 92 aminoacids. It is a
structural analogue of a subunit of FSH. LH and HCG. B subunit is a
polypeptide made up of 118 aminoacids.
GnRH (Gonadotropin releasing Hormone) is a decapeptide with 10
aminocids.
FSH is a glycoprotein with two subunits - a and p. a subunit is a
polypeptide with about 96 aminoacids. It is a structural analogue of a
subunit of TSH. LH and HCG. p subunit is a polypeptide made up of
111 aminoacids.
290. Carbamoyl Phosphate synthetase I
     [CPSI] true is
 a) It is present in cytoplasm

 b) It is involved in pyrimidine synthesis

 c) N- Acetyl Glutamate is an allosteric stimulator of CPSI

 d) Glutamine is the amino group donor for CPSI



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., N- Acetyl Glutamate is an allosteric stimulator of
CPSI
PROPERTYCPS - I                      CPS - II
Pathway        Urea cycle            Pyrimidine synthesis
Subcellular
               Mitochondria          Cytoplasm
location
Amino
Group          Ammonia               Glutamine
donor
                                     Inhibited by the products -
Allosteric     Stimulated by N -
                                     pyrimidine nucleotides,Uridine,Cytidine
regulation Acetyl Glutamate(NAG)
                                     & Thymidine
291. Carbamoyl phosphate synthetase I is:
 a) Lysosolic enzyme

 b) Cytosolic enzyme

 c) Mitochondrial enzyme

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - C
Mitochondrial carbamoyl phosphate synthetase I is an enzyme that
catalyzes a reaction that produces carbamoyl phosphate.
This enzyme catalyzes the reaction of ATP and bicarbonate to
produce carbonyl phosphate and ADP. Carbonyl phosphate reacts
with ammonia to give carbamate
Cytosolic carbamoyl phosphate synthetase II uses glutamine rather
than ammonia as the nitrogen donor and functions in pyrimidine
synthesis.
   292. HHH syndrome is due to defect in ?
    a) Tryptophan metabolism

    b) Histidine transporter

    c) Branched chain AA metabolism

    d) Ornithine transporter



   Correct Answer - D
   Ans. is 'd' i.e., Ornithine transporter [Ref Textbook of clinical
   paediatrics p. 496]
   Hyperornithinaemia, hyperammonaemia, homocitrullinuria (HHH)
   syndrome is an autosomal recessive disorder of ornithine transport
   caused by mutations in gene SLC 25A15 encoding the ornithine
   transorter protein (ORNT1).
   There is defective activity of the ornithine transporter across the
   mitochondrial membrane, which causes a functional deficiency of
   two mitochondrial enzymes:
   Ornithine transcarbomylase : Which catalyses the condensation of
   ornithine and carbamoylphosphate to citrulline.
   Ornithine-8-aminotransferase (OAT) : Which metabolizes the
   ornithine to .'-pyrroline-5-carboxylate and ultimately glutamate and
   proline.
   Ornithine accumulates in the cytoplasm and its deficiency in
   mitochondria causes a secondary urea cycle disorder and
   hyperammonemia.
   Carbamoylphosphate accumulates and undergoes allternate
   metabolism to form :
1. Homocitrulline - Excreted in urine
2. Orotic acid
3. Plasma
  293. All of the following can determine protein
       structure except
   a) Edman's Sequencing

   b) X ray crystallography

   c) Optical rotatory dispersion

   d) Spectrophotometry



   Correct Answer - D
   Ans. is 'd' i.e., Spectrophotometry
   Methods used for studying primary structure :
   A) Sanger's sequencing
   Sanger's reagent is (1 fluro 2,4 Dinitrobenzene)
   B) Edman's Sequencing
   Edman's reagent is Phenylisothiocyanate
   C) Reverse Sequencing
   It has to be supplemented by Mass Spectrometry
   Methods used for studying secondary structure:
1. Optical Rotatory Dispersion
2. Ocular Dichorism
   Methods used for studying tertiary structure:
1. X-ray Crystallography
2. UV spectroscopy
3. NMR spectroscopy
294. Edman's reagent is used for
 a) DNA sequencing

 b) Protein sequencing

 c) Protein Denaturation

 d) DNA denaturation



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Protein sequencing
Edman's reagent is Phenyl isothiocyanate.
Phenyl isothiocyanate is used for sequencing proteins
Phenyl isothiocyanate binds to a aminogroups. In a protein, only
aminoterminal aminoacid's a aminogroup will be free.
Hence when Phenylisothiocyanate is added to a peptide which is
adsorbed on to a glass fibre coated with a polymer, in the presence
of 12% trimethylamine, it reacts with the amine group of N terminal
aminoacid.
By acid hydrolysis, the first aminoacid is cleaved from the
polypeptide chain and the aminoacid is identified by
chromatography.
The cycle is continued. This way 50 aminoacids can be sequenced.
295. Most abundant aminoacid in brain is
 a) Glutamate

 b) Aspartate

 c) Glutamine

 d) Asparagine



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Glutamate
Glutamate is the most abundant free alpha aminoacid found in
Brain.
It is an acidic polar aminoacid.
It is the predominant excitatory neurotransmitter of brain.
It is synthesised in brain from glutamine and a Ketoglutarate.
Glutamate is released from presynaptic excitatory neurons in a
calcium dependent manner.
Glutamate acts on both inotropic and metabotropic receptors.
Inotropic receptors of glutamate include :
Kainate receptors
AMPA receptors
NMDA receptors
296. Cystine has how many molecules of
     cysteine?
 a) 1

 b) 2

 c) 3

 d) 4



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., 2
Cysteine is a sulphur containing aminoacid
It is a polar but uncharged aminoacid
Cysteine with a sulfhydryl group can get oxidised and forms a dimer
(2) called as cystine.
Cysteine acquires its polar nature only by virtue of its sulfhydryl
group.
297. Vitamin given in homocysteinuria are all
     except
 a) Vitamin B6

 b) Vitamin B12

 c) Folate

 d) Thiamine



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Thiamine
Major fate of homocysteine is that it gets converted into cysteine in
the presence of cystathionine I synthase. Cystathionine p synthase
is dependent on pyridoxal phosphate.
Hence defect of cystathionine p synthase can result in
homocysteinuria. This is called as classical homocysteinuria. This
condition responds to B6 administration, as the enzyme cystathione
p synthase is dependent on B6.
Minor fate of homocysteine is that it gets converted into methionine
in the presence of methionine synthase. Methionine synthase is
dependent on methyl cobalamine (coenzyme form of Vitamin
B12). Methyl group donor for methylcobalamine is methyl THFA.
Homocysteinuria is also caused by defect of methionine synthase.
As this enzyme is dependent on Vitamin B12 and THFA,
homocysteinuria responds to B12 and THFA administration
298. Glutathione is used to detoxify which
     free radical?
 a) Hydrogen peroxide

 b) Superoxide

 c) Peroxyl radical

 d) Singlet Oxygen



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Hydrogen peroxide
Glutathione is a tripeptide.
It is gamma glutamyl cysteinyl glycine
It is denoted as GSH - because it has cysteine with a sulphydryl
group
It is used to detoxify hydrogen peroxide and lipid peroxides in the
presence of glutathione peroxidase.
Glutathione can also detoxify peroxyl radical. Peroxyl radical can not
get reduced by enzymatic reactions. They get detoxified by
antioxidants like vitamin E and Glutathione
Singlet oxygen gets detoxified principally by polyphenol antioxidants
Superoxide radicals are detoxified by Superoxide dismutase (SOD)
using Zinc as electron acceptor or donor (Some classes of SODs
use iron or Nickel as electron acceptor or donor)
299. Match enzyme with the disease caused
     due to its deficiency -
      Enzyme                          Disease
                                 A. Tyrosinemia Type II
      Fumarylacetoacetate
                                 hydroxylase
      Tyrosine transaminase
                                 B. Homogentisate Oxidase
      Tyrosinase
                                 C. Tyrosinemia Type I
      Alkaptonuria
                                 D- Albinism

 a) I→ D, 2 → C, 3 → A, 4→ B

 b) I → A,2 → C,3 →D, 4 → B

 c) 1 → C,2→ D,3 → A,4 → B

 d) l→ C, 2→ A, 3→ D, 4→ B



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., 1 -p C, 2 → A, 3 → D, 4 → B [Ref Harper
29th/e p. 289]
300. Which of the following has two amino
     groups-
 a) Glycine

 b) Arginine

 c) Lysine

 d) Asparagine



Correct Answer - B
Histidine has two imino groups.
Lysine has one amino group.
Arginine has two amino groups
301. Alternate fuel for brain is
 a) Glucose

 b) Ketone bodies

 c) Fatty acid

 d) Aminoacid



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Ketone bodies
There is no stored fuel in brain, but it utilizes 60% of total energy
under resting conditions.
Glucose is virtually the sole fuel for the brain, except in prolonged
starving when ketone bodies are the major source.
Fatty acids do not serve as fuel for the brain, because they are
bound to albumin in plasma; hence cannot cross the blood-brain
barrier.
302. Pyruvate can be a substrate of all except
 a) Lactate Dehydrogenase

 b) Malic enzyme

 c) Aspartate transaminase

 d) Alanine transaminase



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Aspartate transaminase
There are several pathways into which pyruvate can enter. The
pathway chosen in a given tissue depends on its state of
oxygenation and prevailing metabolic conditions, as described below
:
Oxidative decarboxylation to acetyl CoA
In tissues that are adequately perfused with oxygen (i.e., under
aerobic conditions), pyruvate undergoes oxidative
decarboxylation to form acetyl CoA, which is further catabolized to
CO2 and H20 via citric acid cycle (Krebs cycle). This reaction serves
as a bridge between glycolysis and Kreb's cycle. Thus, pyruvate
serves as the source of substrate of first reaction of TCA (Citric acid
cycle), i.e., acetyl CoA.
303. Gas released from oligosaccharide
     metabolism by intestinal bacteria is
 a) Carbondioxide

 b) Sulphur dioxide

 c) Nitric oxide

 d) Methane



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Methane
Some food items are high in indigestible oligosaccharides . Eg,
transgalactooligosaccharides, fructooligosaccharides (Inulin)
Since these oligosaccharides do not get digested in the small
intestine, they reach the large intestine.
Large intestinal microorganisms breakdown these oligosaccharides
to form short chain fatty acids like propionate, butyrate. These short
chain fatty acids are found to be trophic to intestinal mucosa. It has
anti-inflammatory effects too. Hence these are found to protect
intestinal malignancy. This is the basis of prebiotics being
supplemented to people with intestinal inflammatory disorders and to
maintain intestinal flora.
But the downside of these indigestible oligosaccharides is that, when
microorganisms act on these oligiosaccharides, they result in gas
production. The gases produced includes the usual hydrogen,
nitrogen and carbondioxide. Apart from that when oligosaccharides
are acted upon by microorganisms, it results in methane production.
This methane is found to have the bloating and flatulence effect.
304. Which vitamin is required for conversion
     of serine to glycine?
 a) Vit C

 b) B12

 c) Pyridoxine

 d) Thiamine



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Pyridoxine [Ref Harper 290/e p. 267-268]
Glycine is a non essential amino acid synthesized from another
nonessential aminoacid serine
Serine in the presence of Serine hydroxyl methyltransferase (SHMT)
gets converted to glycine. SHMT is a pyridoxine dependent enzyme.
This step uses tetrahydrofolate as coenzyme and it gets converted
to N5, N10 methylene THFA, which then acts as 1 carbon donor and
helps in the conversion of uridine to thymidine.
305. Headache and papilledema are features
     of toxicity of which vitamin?
 a) Vitamin A

 b) Vitamin D

 c) Vitamin C

 d) Vitamin E



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Vitamin A
Hypervitaminosis A
Caused by consumption of food rich in vitamin A like fish or liver (not
by excessive intake of carotenoids as the conversion of carotene to
vitamin A is regulated).
Mechanism of toxicity:
Suppresses osteoblasts and stimulates osteoclasts.
High retinol concentrations stimulate lysosomal enzyme release and
cause local tissue damage.
Features include anorexia, irritability, headache, skin peeling,
vomiting. Headache, vomiting and papilledema are found to be
caused by increase in intracranial tension. Hence this condition is
called as pseudotumourcerebri. As vitamin A stimulates osteoclasts,
hypercalcemia, bony projections, pathological fractures are also
observed as features.
306. Which of the following is teratogenic:
 a) Folate

 b) Cyanocobalamin

 c) Vitamin A

 d) Vitamin C



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C: Vitamin A
Pharmacological doses of vitamin A are teratogenic and in
pregnancy the daily dose must not exceed 6000-8000 IU.
Synthetic analogues of vitamin A:
* Tretinoin
* Isotretinoin
* Etretinate
* Acetretin
* Teratogenic drugs
Drugs and medications:
* Tobacco Caffeine
* Drinking alcohol (ethanol) (fetal alcohol spectrum disorder),
* Isotretinoin (13-cis-retinoic acid)
* Temazepam
* Nitrazepam
* Aminopterin or methotrexate
* Androgenic hormones Busulfan
* Captopril, enalapril
* Coumarin
* Cyclophosphamide
* Diethylstilbestrol
* Phenytoin (diphenylhydantoin)
Lithium
* Methimazole
* Penicillamine
* Tetracyclines
* Thalidomide
* Trimethadione
* Flusilazole
* Valproic acid
Environmental chemicals:
* Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (polynuclear aromatic
hydrocarbons)
* Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs)
* Polychlorinated dibenzodioxins a.k.a dioxin,
* Organic mercury
Ionizing radiation:
* Atomic weapons fallout (Iodine-131, uranium)
* Background radiation
Diagnostic x-rays
* Radiation therapy
Infections:
* Cytomegalovirus
* Herpes virus
* Parvovirus B19
* Rubella virus (German measles)
* Syphilis
* Toxoplasmosis An easy way to remember maternal infections is
TORCH: Toxoplasmosis, Other agents, Rubella, CMV and HSV.
Metabolic imbalance:
* Alcoholism
Diabetes
* Folic acid deficiency
* Iodine deficiency
* Hyperthermia
307. Alcoholism leads to deficiency of which
     vitamin ?
 a) Vitamin A

 b) Vitamin B1

 c) Vitamin D

 d) Vitamin B6



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e.,Vitamin B1
Of all the micronutrients, thiamine will be the first micronutrient to
become deficient. Reason is, apart from the person missing his
mixed balanced diet, alcohol is also found to interfere with thiamine
absorption. The third reason related to thiamine deficiency in a
chronic alcoholic is that alcohol interferes with magnesium
absorption. Magnesium is necessary for activation of thiamine to its
coenzyme form thiamine pyrophosphate in the presence of thiamine
kinase.
308. Vitamin B12 is required for all of the
     following except ?
 a) Conversion of homocysteine to methionine

 b) Conversion of homocysteine to cysteine

 c) Conversion of propionyl coA to succinyl CoA

 d) Conversion of methyl THFA to THFA



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Conversion of homocysteine to cysteine
Active form of vitamin B12 are methylcobalamine and
deoxyadenosylcobalamine. Following reactions require vitamin B12
coenzyme :
i) Isomerization of methylmalonyl CoA to succinyl CoA :
In this reaction, active form of vitamin B12 is deoxyadenosyl
cobalamine.
Propionyl-CoA is produced as catabolic end product of some
alipathic amino acids and (3-oxidation of odd chain fatty
acids. Propionyl CoA is then converted to succinyl CoA through
methylmalonyl-CoA.
Thus methylmalonyl-CoA is accumulated and excreted in urine as
methylmalonic acid (methylmalonate) in vitamin B12 deficiency, i.e.
methylmalonic aciduria.
ii) Conversion of homocystein to methionine
In this reaction, active form is methylcobalamine.
This is the only reaction which requires both vitamin 812 (as
methylcobalamine) and folic acid (as N5-methyl-114-folate).
The reaction is catalyzed by the enzyme cobalamin-dependent
methionine synthase also called 5- methyltetrahydrofolate -
homocysteine methyltransferase.
309. Which of the following vitamins is
     significantly synthesised in gut by
     intestinal flora?
 a) Folate

 b) B12

 c) Biotin

 d) B6



Correct Answer - A:B:C
Ans. is 'c > 'b' & 'a' i.e., Biotin > B12 & Folate
Though vitamins are supposed to be essential micronutrients which
are supposed to be supplied in the diet, some vitamins like Vitamin
D and Niacin are endogenously synthesised.
Vitamin D3 or cholecalciferol is synthesised in the skin epidermis
when UV light acts on 7 dehydrocholesterol which is present in the
malphigian layer. UV light opens up one of the rings of cholesterol,
converting cholesterol into a secosteroid which is cholecalciferol.
Cholecalciferol reaches liver. In liver it is hydroxylated at 25th
position by 25 a hydroxylase to form 25 hydroxycholecalciferol
25 hydroxycholecalciferol reaches the kidney. It is hydroxylated at
1st position by 1 a hydroxylase to form 1,25
dihydroxycholecalciferol, the active form of vitamin D.
Niacin's active coenzyme forms NAD and NADP are synthesised
endogenously from aminoacid tryptophan
Apart from these two vitamins synthesised by human metabolic
pathways, there are vitamins like Biotin, Vitamin K which are
synthesised to significant amount in large intestine by intestinal
microorganisms. Research has identified synthesis of folate and B12
as well in large intestine.
Though they are synthesised in large intestine, as all water soluble
vitamins get absorbed in small intestine, only endogenously
synthesised Biotin and Vitamin K are found to contribute significantly
to metabolic pathways. That is why biotin and vitamin K deficiencies
are relatively rare.
310. Chain breaking antioxidants are all
     except -
 a) Tocopherol

 b) Ascorbic acid

 c) Polyphenolic flavinols

 d) Superoxide dismutase



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Superoxide dismutase
Chain breaking antioxidants are molecules which can donate an
electron or accept electron from unstable intermediates of lipid
peroxidation converting them into stable intermediates.
They are of two two types
Lipid phase chain breaking antioxidant
Aqueous phase chain breaking antioxidant
Lipid phase chain breaking antioxidant
The most important lipid phase chain breaking antioxidant is a
tocopherol. a tocopherol reacts with peroxyl radical to form
tocopheroxyl radical with excess charge associated with extra
electron being distributed along the chromane ring.
Aqueous phase chain breaking antioxidant
The most important chain breaking antioxidant of this type is
ascorbic acid or vitamin C. It can scavenge many superoxide
radicals. Most importantly it helps by regenerating tocopherol after it
is oxidised during the process of reducing peroxyl radicals.
Apart from vitamin C we have a group of polyphenol flavinols like
epitachin gallate which can reduce oxidant species in aqueous
phase. These are present in green tea and some antioxidant
supplements
Superoxide dismutase is an antioxidant enzyme which helps in
detoxifying superoxides to form molecular oxygen and hydrogen
peroxide. It is not a chain breaking antioxidant
311. Which of the following elements is
     known to influence the body's ability to
     handle oxidative stress?
 a) Fluride

 b) Iron

 c) Copper

 d) Selenium



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Selenium [Ref: Pankaj Naik p. 382]
The activity of the antioxidant enzymes depends on supply of
minerals:?
* Manganese
* Zinc
* Copper
* Selenium
  - Manganese, copper and zinc are required for the activity of
superoxide dismutase.
  - Selenium is required for the activity of glutathione peroxidase.
312. Vitamin B12 deficiency causes all except
     ?
 a) Homocysteinuria

 b) Methylmalonic aciduria

 c) Subacute combined degeneration

 d) Epinephrine excess



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e.,Epinephrine excess [Ref Dinesh Puri 3rd le p. 381]
Deficiency of vitamin B12 causes Pernicious anemia, megaloblastic
anemia (secondary to functional folate deficiency due to folate trap),
methylmalonic aciduria due to accumulation of methylmalonyl-CoA,
and neuropathy, like subacute combined degeneration (SACD) and
demyelination.
There may homocysteinuria as methionine synthase, a
methylcobalamine dependent enzyme, is defective.
313. Deficiency of which vitamin during
     pregnancy predisposes to
     meningomyelocele?
 a) Folic acid

 b) Biotin

 c) Pyridoxine

 d) Thiamine



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e.,Folic acid
Folic acid deficiency in pregnancy predisposed to NTD (e.g.
myelomeningocele, meningocele, spina bifida).
314. Richest source of vitamin B12 ?
 a) Meat

 b) Green leafy vegetables

 c) Corn oil

 d) Sunflower oil



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Meat
Vitamin B12 is naturally found in animal products, including fish,
meat, poultry, eggs, milk, and milk products.
Vitamin B12 is generally not present in plant foods, but fortified
breakfast cereals are a readily available source of vitamin B12 with
high bioavailability for vegetarians.
Rich source of vitamin B12→
Beef, liver, and chicken.
Fish and shellfish such as trout, salmon, tuna fish, and clams.
Fortified breakfast cereal.
Low-fat milk, yogurt, and cheese.
Eggs.
315. Regarding NAD and NADP, true is ?
 a) Precursor is tyrosine

 b) Malic enzyme is an NAD dependent enzyme

 c) High leucine causes niacin deficiency

 d) Niacin deficiency causes cutaneous vasodilatation



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., High leucine causes niacin deficiency
NAD and NADP are nicotinic acid derivatives which is synthesized
from tryptophan (not tyrosin)
Malic enzyme is NADP dependent enzyme (not NAD dependent)
Excess of leucine inhibits the conversion of tryptophan into niacin
and causes pellagra.
Niacin deficiency causes Pellagra. Pellagra characterised by the
three Ds - Diarrhoea, Dermatitis and Dementia is caused by niacin
or vitamin B3 deficiency.
316. Antistress Vitamin is?
 a) Vitamin B1

 b) Vitamin B2

 c) Vitamin B3

 d) Vitamin B5



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Vitamin B5
Vitamin B5 or pantothenic acid is called as an antistress vitamin as it
is found to have an impact on cortisol release and is found to
support our immune system.
317. True about Purine synthesis ?
 a) Glutamine is the amino group donor for N9

 b) PRPP synthetase is the rate limiting enzyme of purine synthesis

 c) THFA is necessary for forming C6 of purine ring

 d) GMP is the first nucleotide to be formed during purine synthesis



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e.,Glutamine is the amino group donor for N9
In purine nucleotide synthesis, first Ribose 5 phosphate is activated
by PRPP synthetase to form PRPP.
This PRPP gets attached to N9 (source is glutamine) in the
presence of PRPP glutamine amido transferase. This is the rate
limiting enzyme of purine synthesis.
PRPP synthetase is a common enzyme of pyrimidine nucleotide
synthesis and of niacin adenine dinucleotide synthesis. As PRPP
synthetase is not committed for Purine nucleotide synthesis, it can
not be considered as the rate limiting enzyme of purine synthesis.
In purine synthesis, Inosine monophosphate (IMP) is first formed
IMP on amination with Aspartate gives rise to AMP in the presence
of adenylosuccinate synthetase. This step needs GTP as a source
of energy
IMP on dehydrogenation by IMP dehydrogenase followed by
amination with glutamine will give rise to GMP. This step used ATP
as a source of energy
318. True about pyrimidine catabolism is ?
 a) It is a source of uric acid

 b) β aminoisobutyrate is generated

 c) Unlike other catabolic pathways, it does not generate
    intermediates of citric acid cycle

 d) Increased pyrimidine catabolism causes decreased synthesis of
    carnosine



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., β aminoisobutyrate is generated
In pyrimidine catabolism, first cytidine and thymidine are converted
to uridine by deamination and demethylation respectively.
Uridine in the presence of phosphorylase gets converted into uracil.
Uracil undergoes hydrogenation in the presence of dihydrouracil
dehydrogenase to form dihydrouracil
Dihydrouracil hydratase opens the ring of dihydrouracil to form a
linear structure
319. Regarding FISH all are true except ?
 a) Used to detect copy number variations

 b) Used to detect balanced translocations

 c) Requires oligonucleotides

 d) Requires DNA polymerase



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Requires DNA polymerase
Fluoroscent in Situ Hybridisation is a cytogenetic technique used
to detect chromosomal abnormalities.
This technique uses fluorescently labelled oligonucleotides or DNA
probes. These probes bind to specific sequences of a chromosome.
Attached to the probes are reporter fluorescent dyes which under
fluorescence microscopy confirm the presence or absence of a
particular chromosomal aberration.
In FISH, the target is the nuclear DNA of either interphase cells or of
metaphase chromosomes affixed to a microscope slide. When a
specific probe is added, it anneals to its complementary sequence in
the affixed DNA. As the probe is labelled with a reporter molecule it
is visualized by fluorescence microscopy
320. All of the following are true about
     Nucleic Acid Sequence Based
     Amplification except ?
 a) It is a specific amplification of RNA

 b) It is a replacement for reverse transcriptase PCR

 c) Denaturation is carried out at 94°C

 d) It requires Reverse transcriptase.



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Denaturation is carried out at 94°C
Nucleic Acid Sequence Based Amplification (NASBA) or Isothermal
RNA amplification is a replacement for Reverse transcriptase PCR
(RT-PCR).
Both NASBA and RT-PCR are used for amplifying desired or
specific RNA fragments.
In RT-PCR, first the desired RNA is converted to dsDNA using
reverse transcriptase and then the dsDNA is amplified using PCR
technique
321. The linkage which links individual
     nucleotides in a polynucleotide chain is -
 a) p N- Glycosidic linkage

 b) a N - glycosidic linkage

 c) 3'5' Phosphodiester linkage

 d) 5'3' Phosphodiester linkages



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., 3'5' Phosphodiester linkage
Nucleoside                N-glycosidic bond between pentose sugar
                          and nitrogenous base.
Nucleotide                Posphoester linkage (not phosphodiester)
(monophasphate            between nucleoside and phosphate grp.
nucleatide)
Diphosphate &             Acid anhydride linkage between
polyphosphate             monophosphate & other phosphate grp
nucleotides
 Polynucleotide chain 3'5' phosphodiester linkage between 3'
                          hydroxyl group nucleotide with 5'
                          phosphate group of next nucleotide.
322. Bond formation between ribose sugar
     and nitrogen is ?
 a) Acidanhydride linkage

 b) Phosphodiester linkage

 c) Phosphoester linkage

 d) Glycosidic linkage



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Glycosidic linkage
Pentose sugar (ribose or deoxyribose) is linked to a nitrogenous
base (purine or pyrimidine) via covalent N-glycosidic bond to form
nucleoside
323. Ataxia telangiectasia is caused by a
     defect of ?
 a) Base Excision Repair

 b) Nucleotide Excision repair

 c) Mismatch repair

 d) ds DNA break repair



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., ds DNA break repair
DNA repair                  Defect associated
Mismatch repair             Hereditary Non polyposis Colon Cancer
Nucleotide Excision         Xeroderma pigmentosa, Cockayne
Repair                      syndrome
Double Stranded DNA         Ataxia Telangiectasia, Bloom's
Break                       syndrome,
Repair                      Fanconi's anemia
324. Jumping genes are ?
 a) Moderately repetitive sequences

 b) Highly repetitive sequences

 c) Satellite sequences

 d) Simple segment repeat sequences



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Moderately repetitive sequences
325. Molecular mimicry is established in the
     presence of ?
 a) Cysteine

 b) Alanine

 c) Glycine

 d) Tryptophan



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Cysteine
Molecular mimicry is caused by structural homology or similarity
between foreign antigens and self-antigens.
As a result of structural similarity a T cell or B cell activated against a
foreign antigen cross reacts with self-antigen and causes
autoimmunity.
Molecular mimicry does not always expect a sequence similarity to
get initiated. It is found to be induced even when the self antigens
and exogenous antigens share the same binding motif with MHC
(Major Histocompatibility Complex).
This binding motif similarity is more often found in the presence of
cysteine (forms disulphide bridges), arginine or lysine (form
hydrogen bonds) in the binding site of antigens.
326. DNA fragments are separated by ?
 a) Ultracentrifugation

 b) Agarose gel electrophoresis

 c) Paper chromatography

 d) High pressure liquid chromatography



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Agarose gel electrophoresis [Ref Essentials of
biochemistry p. 756]
DNA is cut into large fragments, using restriction enzymes. These
fragments are then separated by gel electrophoresis (either agarose
or polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis).
327. Left handed helix is seen in -
 a) B DNA

 b) A DNA

 c) Z DNA

 d) F DNA



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Z DNA
Based on quartenary structure of DNA many conformations are
possible out of the common three forms are – B DNA, A DNA and Z
DNA.
Z DNA
It is found in those regions of chromosomes which are rich in GC
sequences
It is a left handed helix
Every full turn has 12 base pairing.
328. Aminoacyl tRNA gets attached to which
     site of ribosome?
 a) P site of 40s ribosome

 b) A site of 60s ribosome

 c) A site of 40s ribosome

 d) P site of 60s ribosome



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., A site of 60s ribosome
Translation is a process by which nucleotide bases of mRNA get
translated as aminoacid sequences of polypeptide chain. It takes
part in free ribosome.
Free ribosome reads the mRNA from 5' end to 3' end. It reads the
codons of mRNA one by one. Depending upon the codon that is
present in mRNA, ribosome is capable of attaching a
complementary anticodon containing tRNA.
This tRNA carries a corresponding aminoacid. This way the
polypeptide chain grows from amino terminal end to carboxy
terminal end.
Eukaryotic ribosome is a 80s unit. It dissociates into 40s and 60s
subunits. 60s subunit contains P site and A site.
When ribosome enters into chain elongation, on the P site of 60s, is
attached the AUG codon of mRNA, to which initiation methionine
tRNA is attached and A site is free
329. Okazaki fragments are formed during ?
 a) Transcription

 b) Translation

 c) DNA replication

 d) None



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., DNA replication
330. Splicing is a process of ?
 a) Activation of protein

 b) Removal of introns

 c) Synthesis of protein

 d) Replication of DNA



Correct Answer - B
In molecular biology and genetics, splicing is a modification of an
RNA after transcription, in which introns are removed and exons are
joined.
This is needed for the typical eukaryotic messenger RNA before it
can be used to produce a correct protein through translation.
For many eukaryotic introns, splicing is done in a series of reactions
which are catalyzed by the spliceosome a complex of small nuclear
ribonucleoproteins (snRNAs), but there are also self-splicing introns.
331. Proteins are stored as ?
 a) Structural proteins

 b) Functional proteins

 c) Fats

 d) Lysosomal enzymes



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Fats
There is no storage form of protein
Hence the aminoacids formed by breakdown of proteins undergo
catabolism
During catabolism, most of the aminoacids give off their amino
groups and then the carbon skeleton undergoes catabolism
On catabolism, the carbon skeleton of aminoacids give rise to
glycolytic intermediate or citric acid cycle intermediates.
332. Flow cytometry is done on
 a) Polycythemia

 b) Thrombocytosis

 c) Basophil

 d) Lymphocytes



Correct Answer - D
Ans. d. Lymphocytes
"Flow cytometry can rapidly and quantitatively measure several
individual cell characteristics, such as membrane antigens and the
DNA content of tumor cells. Flow cytometry has also proved useful
in the identification and classification of tumors arising from T and B
lymphocytes and from mononuclear-phagocytic cells."- Robbins 8/e
p324
333. True about tRNA ?
 a) 80% of total RNA

 b) Contains 50-60 nucleotides

 c) CCA sequence is transcribed

 d) Longest RNA



Correct Answer - C
"The CCA tail is a CCA sequence at 3' end of the tRNA molecule. In
prokaryotes, CCA sequence is transcribed. In eukaryotes, the CCA
sequence is added during processing".
"tRNA is the smallest of three major species of RNAs" — Dinesh
puri
tRNA comprises 15% of total RNA in the cell. It contains 73-93
nucleotide residue.
334. Most commonly used vector for DNA
     cloning ?
 a) Plasmid

 b) Virus

 c) Cosmid

 d) Phage



Correct Answer - A
Ans: A. Plasmid
A cloning vector is a carrier DNA molecule to which human DNA
fragment is attached. Normally, foreign DNA fragments cannot self-
replicate within host cell. Therefore, they are joined to a vector DNA,
that can replicate within host cell.
The five major types of cloning vectors used are -
* Plasmids
* Viral vectors/Bacteriophages
* Cosmids
* Bacterial Artificial Chromosomes (BACs)
* Yeast artificial chromosomes (YACs)
335. Chimeric DNA true are all except ?
 a) Formed by linking DNA fragments of unrelated genome

 b) Sticky end producing restriction endonucleases favour
    formation of chimeric DNA

 c) They don't require DNA ligases

 d) The organism harbouring a chimeric DNA has features of
    themselves and the properties of the insert



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., They don't require DNA ligases
Chimeric DNA or recombinant DNA is formed by linking DNA
fragments of two unrelated genome.
It is a step involved in recombinant DNA technology.
It is done to introduce a favourable quality into an organism like
ability to produce insulin by E.Coli (Done by linking insulin cDNA into
a vector and introducing the recombinant vector or chimeric DNA
into E.Coli) or insect resistance in crops (done my introducing the
gene fragment capable of producing Bacillus thurengiensis) into Ti
plasmid and introducing the chimeric DNA or recombinant DNA into
growing plants).
336. What is the role of catabolite activator protein (CAP) in LAC operon?
 a) Positive regulator

 b) Negative regulator

 c) Attenuation

 d) Constitutive expression



Correct Answer - A
Catabolite activator protein, CAP is an activator required for high
level transcription of the lac operon. CAP protein exerts positive
control and lac repressor exerts negative control.
What is an Operon?

In prokaryotes, the genes coding for proteins involved in a particular
metabolic pathway are often sequentially arranged- together on the
chromosome along with a single promoter or regulatory region. This
entire cluster is termed as an operon, for eg, the lac operon (coding
proteins for metabolism of lactose) or trp operon (coding proteins
needed for the synthesis of tryptophan).

Lac operon:

Lac operon contains lacZ, lacY and lacA genes encoding beta
galactosidase, galactose permease and thiogalactoside
transacetylase and is preced by an operator (O) site and promoter
(P) site. The operon is transcribed by RNA polymerase to produce a
single polycistronic mRNA that is translated to produce all three
enzymes which are involved in lactose metabolism.
337. LacY in Lac Operon codes for ?
 a) B Galactosidase

 b) Galactoside Permease

 c) Thiogalactoside Transacetylase

 d) Repressor



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Galactoside Permease
These code for 3 proteins that are involved in catabolism of lactose.
These genes are 'Z' gene (codes for P-galactosidase), 'Y' gene
(codes for galactoside permease), and 'A' gene (codes for
thiogalactoside transacetylase).
338. Ubiquitin Proteasome pathway is used
     for degradation of ?
 a) Extracellular long lived proteins

 b) Intracellular long lived proteins

 c) Intracellular short lived proteins

 d) Extracellular short lived proteins



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Intracellular short lived proteins
Extracellular proteins and intracellular long lived proteins get
degraded in lysosomes with the help of cathepsin
Intracellular short lived proteins get labelled with ubiquitin once their
life span gets over.
339. Small RNAs are ?
 a) Between 200 and 500 bps in length

 b) Coded by small exons

 c) A mode of regulation of gene expression

 d) Always endogenously synthesised



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., A mode of regulation of gene expression
Small RNAs are less than 200 nucleotides in length.
They are coded by intronic sequences of genes.
They help in regulation of gene expression through GENE
SILENCING mechanism
The miRNA gene sequences located within intronic sequences are
transcribed by RNA polymerase III to form Pri-miRNA.
Pri- miRNA is processed by microprocessor complex to form a stem
loop structure, Pre-miRNA.
340. All of the following are true about
     collagen structure except -
 a) Collagen is secreted by fibroblasts as procollagen

 b) Lysyl oxidase is dependent on Vitamin C

 c) Hydroxylysine undergoes glycosylation

 d) Glycine is the most abundant aminoacid of collagen



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Lysyl oxidase is dependent on Vitamin C
Collagen is the most abundant protein in the body.
Collagen is a triple helix. It is made up of 3 polypeptide chains -
Each polypeptide chain has about 1000 amino acids. It is made up
of repetitive units of (Gly- X - Y), where X and Y are most commonly
proline and hydroxyproline. Hence 33% of aminoacid residues of
collagen is glycine - the most abundant aminoacid of collagen.
Collagen is synthesised as procollagen by fibroblasts intracellularly.
After translation of mRNA of collagen in ribosomes, the polypeptide
chains undergo posttranslational modifications in the form of
hydroxylation and glycosylation.
341. The most abundant aminoacid of
     collagen is -
 a) Glycine

 b) Proline

 c) Lysine

 d) Tryptophan



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Glycine
342. Folds in collagen are due to-
 a) Glycine

 b) Proline

 c) Hydroxyproline

 d) Lysine



Correct Answer - A:B
Ans. is `b > a' i.e., Proline > Glycine [Ref Essentials of
biochemisty p. 868]
Two amino acids are involved in producing folds in collagen : proline
and glycine.
In order to form a triple-helix a polypeptide chain (a-chain) must
contain glycine as every third residue in the sequence.
This is because only the glycine is small enough to be
accommodated in the limited space available down the central core
of the triple helix. Each turn of polypeptide chain (a-chain) contains
three amino acid residues, and glycine (Gly) is present at every third
position.
Thus glycine constitutes 33% of the total amino acid residues. The
repeating amino acid residues, represented as (Gly-X-Y)n, is an
absolute requirement for formation of triple helix. X and Y can be
any amino acids, but most of the time Xis proline (10% of the total
amino acid residues) and most of the time Y is hydroxyproline. Other
important amino acids found in collagen are lysine and
hydroxylysine.
343. Heme synthesis requires
 a) Ferrous iron

 b) Glycine

 c) Succhyl CoA

 d) All



Correct Answer - D
344. Heme is which porphyrin ?
 a) Type I

 b) Type II

 c) Type III

 d) Type IV



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Type III
345. Gerhardt's test is used to detect ?
 a) Reducing sugar

 b) Ketone body

 c) Protein

 d) Blood



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Ketone body
Gerhardt's test is a test used to detect acetoacetate in urine
(acetone and (3 hydroxybutyrate do not answer this test).
Reagents used for Gerhardt's test include Concentrated nitric acid
and 10% Ferric chloride
346. Genetically mediated VLDL
     overproduction is a feature of all except
     ?
 a) Familial combined hyperlipidemia

 b) Hypoapobetalipoproteinemia

 c) Familial dyslipidemic hypertension

 d) LDL subclass B



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Hypoapobetalipoproteinemia [Ref Essentials of
Biochemistry p. 712]
Familial combined hyperlipidemia or Type lib Familial
hyperlipoproteinemia is characterised by genetically determined
overproduction of triglyceride rich VLDL (VLDL 1) and small dense
LDL particles.
It is the most commonly inherited disorder. Please remember
Acquired combined hyperlipidemia with same features is caused by
metabolic syndrome or insulin resistance.
Hyperapobetalipoproteinemia is characterized by an increased
number of small, dense LDL particles and an elevated LDL-B level
with normal or borderline high LDL-C levels. Patients with
Hyperapobetalipoproteinemia may have normal or high triglycerides.
Hyperapobetalipoproteinemiahas been found to be the most
common phenotype (34%) associated with premature CAD
;Hyperapobetalipoproteinemia with hypertriglyceridemiais found to
be even more strongly associated with CAD than
Hyperapobetalipoproteinemia with normal triglycerides.
347. Abetalipoproteinemia affects ?
 a) Retinal pigment epithelium

 b) Optic nerve

 c) Occipital cortex

 d) Bipolar neurons



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Retinal pigment epithelium
Abetalipoproteinemia or Bassen-Kornzweig syndrome is caused by
a defect of Microsomal Triglyceride Transfer Protein (MTTP).
In abetalipoproteinemia, both chylomicron and VLDL formation get
affected.
As a result, fat absorption is affected and the affected child presents
with steatorrhea in the first few months of life.
All fat soluble vitamin absorption also get affected. Hence Vitamin A,
D, E and K deficiency is expected, however Vitamin E deficiency is
found to have profound effects.
Vitamin E deficiency presents as retinitis pigmentosa and subacute
combined degeneration.
Other features of abetalipoproteinemia are acanthocytes (star
shaped RBCs in peripheral smear caused because the lipid
composition of RBC membrane gets affected), hypocholesterolemia.
Treatment involves vitamin E administration.
348. Synthetic oxygen carrier is ?
 a) 2,4 dinitrophenol

 b) Chloflurocarbon

 c) Perflurocarbon

 d) 1 fluro 2,4 dinitrophenol



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Chloflurocarbon
Blood doping is a form of fraudulent increase in the oxygen carrying
capacity of a person, widely used to improve the aerobic capacity of
athletes
This is done by various methods
Autologous blood transfusion
Homologous blood transfusion
Erythropoietin or Continuous Erythropoietin Receptor Activator
349. Pepsinogen is activated by ?
 a) Enterokinase

 b) Enteropeptidase

 c) H+

 d) Trypsin



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is c i.e.,H+
Pepsin is secreted by chief cells of stomach in an inactive
(zymogen) form called pepsinogen.
Acid (IF) in lumen of stomach converts pepsinogen to active pepsin.
Pepsin once formed also attacks pepsinogen producing more pepsin
molecules by autocatalysis.
350. Which of the following accumulates in
     maple syrup urine disease
 a) Leucine

 b) Valine

 c) Isoleucine

 d) All



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is `d' i.e., All
Maple syrup urine disease (MSUD) or branched-chain
ketoaciduria
* It is an inborn error of metabolism of branched-chain amino
acids valine, leucine and isoleucine.
* It is due to deficiency of an enzyme that catalyzes the second
reaction in these amino acids metabolism i.e. branched chain-a
keto acid dehydrogenase which catalyzes the decarboxylation of
branched-chain amino acids.
* As a result, the branched-chain amino acids, leucine, isoleucine
and valine, and their a-keto acids accumulate in the blood, urine,
and CSF.
* There is a characteristic maple syrup odour to the urine.
* In maple syrup urine disease there is the excretion of branched-
chain amino acids (isoleucine, leucine, valine) and their keto acids
(α-keto β-methyl valerate, α-ketoisocaproate, α-ketoisovalerate) in
the urine.
351. Heme is synthesized from ?
a) Lysine + succinyl CoA

b) Glycine + succinyl CoA

c) Arginine + Malonyl CoA

d) Glycine + Malonyl CoA



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Glycine + succinyl CoA
Organelle: Partly cytoplasmic and partly mitochondrial
Starting materials: Succinyl CoA and Glycine
352. Glycemic index is defined as:
 a) Glucose control in last 3 months

 b) Measure of the change in the blood glucose following ingestion
    of proteins

 c) Measure of the change in the blood glucose following ingestion
    of carbohydrate

 d) Measure of the change in the blood glucose following ingestion
    of fats.



Correct Answer - C
The Glycemic index (GI) of a carbohydrate containing food is a
measure of the change in the blood glucose following its ingestion
353. True about coproporphyrin I and
     coproporphyrin III is -
 a) Coproporphyrin I is excreted in urine

 b) Coproporphyrin III is excreted in bile

 c) In Dubin Johnson Syndrome, Coproporphyrin I in urine is 80%
    of the total coproporphyrin

 d) In Dubin Johnson Syndrome, total coproporphyrin levels is
    elevated



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., In Dubin Johnson Syndrome, Coproporphyrin I in
urine is 80% of the total coproporphyrin
Coproporphyrins are intermediates of heme synthesis
Normally coproporphyrin I is excreted in bile and is lost in feces
Coproporphyrin III is excreted in urine
Hence in normal urine Coproporphyrin I is 25% of total
coproporphyrin levels in urine
Dubin Johson syndrome, is a form of conjugated hyperbilirubinemia
and is caused by a defect of Multi Drug Resistant Protein 2 (MRP-2),
which is responsible for secreting bile components (conjugated bile
pigments) from hepatocytes into biliary canaliculi.
In this disorder, the ratio of Coproporphyrin I : Coproporphyrin III is
reversed and coproporhyrin I is more than 80% of the total
Coproporphyrin levels. But the total coproporphyrin levels is normal.
Possible mechanism is Coproporphyrin I is secreted into bile through
MRP-2.
354. Vitamin A deficiency leads to metaplasia
     of?
 a) Squamous epithelium

 b) Columnar epithelium

 c) Both

 d) None



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Squamous metaplasia
It occurs most frequently in respiratory tract as a result of chronic
irritation by cigarette smoking. The columnar epithelium is replaced
by squamous epithelium. This squamous metaplasia represents an
attempt by the host to repair or prepare an epithelial tissue that has
been damaged by environmental toxicants with a more resistant
tissue.
Squamous metaplasia is also encountered in other location such as
pancreatic duct (Vit A deficiency, stones in
pancreatic duct), gall bladder (gall stones), urinary bladder (bladder
calculi, Schistosomiasis), and in endocervix.
Though the metaplasia is reversible, if the influences that predispose
to metaplasia is persistent, malignant transformation may occur in
metaplastic epithelium.
355. Physiological hyperplasia and
     hypertrophy are seen simultaneously in -
 a) Uterus in pregnancy

 b) Skeletal muscle in atheleteas

 c) Breast at puberty

 d) a and c



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'a > c' i.e., Uterus in pregnancy > Breast at puberty
Physiological hypertrophy and hyperplasia
* Examples of physiologically increased growth of tissues include : -
  - Skeletal muscle hypertrophy in atheletes, both in the skeletal
muscle of limbs (as a response to increased muscle activity) and in
left ventricle of heart (as a response to sustained outflow
resistance).
  - Hyperplasia of bone marrow cells producing red blood cells in
individuals living at high altitude; this is stimulated by increased
production of the erythropoietin.
  - Hyperplasia of breast at puberty, and in pregnancy and lactation,
under the influence of estrogen, progesterone, prolactin and human
placental lactogen.
  - Hypertrophy and hyperplasia of uterine smooth muscle in
pregnancy, stimulated by estrogen.
  - Thyroid hyperplasia as a consequence of the increased metabolic
demand of puberty and pregnancy. For option 'c'
  - "Hormonal hyperplasia is well illustrated by the proliferation of the
glandular epithelium of the female breast at puberty and during
pregnancy, usually accompanied by enlargement (hypertrophy) of
the glandular epithelial cell" -
* However, I am not sure about this statement of Robbin's, as no
* However, I am not sure about this statement of Robbin's, as no
other text book has mentioned that breast at puberty undergo both
hyperplasia and hypertrophy.
   356. Example of coagulative necrosis is -
    a) Acute tubular necrosis

    b) Stroke

    c) Malignant hypertension

    d) Acute pancreatitis



   Correct Answer - A
   Answer- A. Acute tubular necrosis
   The causes of coagulative necrosis are :
1. Coagulative necrosis is most frequently caused by sudden cessation
   of blood flow (ischemia) in solid organssuch as heart (MI), Kidney
   (ATN), Liver, adrenal gland, spleen. Amongst solid organs brain is
   the only exception, i.e., it is the only solid organ in which ischemia
   leads to liquefactive necrosis and not coagulative necrosis.
2. Toxic products of certain bacteria, as in calf diphtheria, necrophorus
   enteritis and other forms necrobacillosis.
3. Certain locally acting poisons, e.g., mercuric chloride.
4. Mild burns (thermal injury), whether produced by heat, electricity, or
   x-rays.
5. Zenker's degeneration necrosis of muscle. It occurs in typhoid.
   Rectus and diaphragm are the usual muscles affected
357. Dystrophic calcification is seen in ?
 a) Milk alkali syndrome

 b) Atheromatous plaque

 c) Hyperparathyroidism

 d) Vitamin A intoxication



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Atheromatous plaque
Dystrophic calcification
* When pathological calcification takes place in dead, dying or
degenerated tissue, it is called dystrophic calcification. o Calcium
metabolism is not altered and serum calcium level is normal.
Dystrophic calcification in      Dystrophic calcification in
dead tissues                     degenerated tissues
1.In caseous necrosis of 1. Atheromatous plague
tuberculosis                  2. Monkeberg's sclerosis
(most common which may be     3. Psommama bodies
in lymph nodes)               4. Dens old scars
2.Chronic abscess in          5. Senile degenrated changes such
liquifactive necrosis            as in costal cartilage, tracheal,
3.Fungal granuloma               bronchial rings, Pineal gland in
4.Infarct                        brain.
5.Thrombi                     6. Heart valves damaged by
6.Haematomas                     rheumatic fever.
7.Dead parasites-
Cystecercosis/Toxoplasma
Hydatid/Schistosoma
8.In fat necrosis of breast &
other tissues
How does calcification occurs in these site with normal serum
calcium ?
* Calcification of dead and dying cells and tissues is a common
finding in human pathologic conditions.
* Denatured proteins in dead or irreversible damaged tissues
preferentially bind phosphate ions.
* Phosphate ions react with calcium ions to form a precipitate or
calcium phosphate.
* Thus, necrotic tissue serves as a calcium sink.
358. What is the first sign of injury?
 a) Mitochondrial dysfunction

 b) Membrane damage

 c) Diminished ATP

 d) Release of lysosomal enzymes



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Mitochondrial dysfunction
hypoxia is the most common cause of cell injury.
Oxygen is an important requirement of mitochondria for the
formation of ATP; therefore, hypoxia will result in the earliest
involvement of mitochondria resulting in decreased formation of
ATP.
Diminished ATP constitutes the critical mechanism of the cellular
injury which leads to:
a. Intracellular accumulation of Ca+2
b. Mitochondrial dysfunction
c. Membrane damage
d. Release of lysosomal (hydrolytic) enzymes
359. Blebs are found in which type of injury?
 a) Reversible

 b) Irreversible

 c) Both

 d) None



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Reversible
Pathological features of reversible cell injury are : Cellular swelling
(earliest); loss of microvilli; cytoplasmic membrane blebs; ER
swelling; Myeline figures; detachment of ribosome from ER;
cytoplasmic (lipid) vacuole; clumping of chromatin.
360. Hydropic change is due to -
 a) Accumulation of water intracellularly

 b) Fat accumulation intracellularly

 c) Lysozyme degeneration

 d) Glycogen accumulation intracellularly



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A> Accumulation of water intracellulary
Hydropic change (abominoid degeneration, hydropic degeneration,
parenchymatous degeneration, cloudy swelling) of a cell is
degenerative change, in which the cells swell due to injury to the
membrane affecting Ionic transfer, causing the cytoplasm to appear
cloudy and water to accumulate between the cells, with resultant
Swelling of the tissue.
Cellular swelling (hydropic change) is the earliest change in cell
injury (reversible).
361. Nuclei are arranged at the cell periphery
     in which type of cell?
 a) Langhans giant cell

 b) Merkel cells

 c) NK cells

 d) Neutrophils



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Langhans giant cell
Peripheral nuclei are seen in Langhans type giant cells
Langhans giant cells are large cells found
in granulomatous conditions.
They are formed by the fusion of epithelioid cells (macrophages) and
contain nuclei arranged in a horseshoe-shaped pattern in the cell
periphery.
These cells contain 3-5 nuclei. Nuclei are arranged around the
periphery in the form of a horseshoe. These cells may also act as
precursors of foreign body giant cells. These cells are seen in TB &
sarcoidosis.
362. Not true about VEGF is -
 a) Highly specific for endothelium

 b) Hypoxia potentiates its expression

 c) Inhibits angiogenesis

 d) Helps in tumor metastasis



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Inhibits angiogenesis
Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is a potent angiogenic
factor and was first described as an essential growth factor for
vascular endothelial cells.
VEGF is up-regulated in many tumors and its contribution to tumor
angiogenesis is well defined.
In addition to endothelial cells, VEGF receptors are expressed on
numerous non-endothelial cells including tumor cells.
Binds to endo-specific receptors Flt-1 and Flk-1 (of the tyrosine
kinase family).
Expression of VEGF potentiated by hypoxia and inactivation of p53.
The two most important angiogenic factors in a tumor are VEGF and
basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF), thus helping in tumor
metastasis.
363. Endothelial molecule involved in rolling
     is -
 a) ICAM 1

 b) VCAM 1

 c) CD 31

 d) CD 34



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. CD 34
Endothelial molecule- Major Role
P-selectin- Rolling
E-selectin- Rolling and adhesion
GlyCam- 1, CD34- Rolling
ICAM-1 (Immunoglobulin family)- Adhesion, arrest, transmigration
VCAM-1 (Immunoglobulin family)- Adhesion
PECAM-1 (CD-31)- Diapedesis (transmigration)
364. Acute phase reactants are stimulated by
     -
 a) IL-6

 b) IL-1

 c) TNF-a

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. All of the above
In response to injury, local inflammatory cells (neutrophil
granulocytes and macrophages) secrete a number of cytokines into
the bloodstream, most notable of which are the interleukins IL6 and
IL8, and TNFa. The liver responds by producing a large number of
acute-phase reactants.
365. Vasodilatation following endothelial
     damage is due to ?
 a) Histamine

 b) IL-2

 c) TGF-3

 d) FGF



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Histamine
Vasodilatation :- Histamine, prostaglandins (PG D2, PGE2),
prostacyclins, serotonin, Nitric oxide, bradykinin
366. Lymphotactin is which type of
     chemokine?
 a) C

 b) C- C

 c) C-X-C

 d) C-X3-C



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. C-X-C
C - chemokines :- They are specific for lymphocytes, e.g.
lymphotactin.
367. Primary granules contain which enzyme?
 a) Myeloperoxidase

 b) Hydrolases

 c) Lactoferrin

 d) Phospholipase A2



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Myeloperoxidase
Myeloperoxidase
Lysozyme
Acid hydrolases
Elasases
Nonspecific collegenase
Bacterial permeability protein
Defensin (BPI)
Cathepsin G
Phospholipase A2
368. Active compound secreted by
     neutrophills against pathogen is known
     as?
 a) Major basic protein

 b) Myeloperoxidase

 c) Hydrolase

 d) Proteoglycans



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Myeloperoxidase
The azurophilic granules of neutrophils contain the enzyme
myeloperoxidase (MPO), which In the presence of a halide such as
Cl-, convertes H202 to hypochlorite (HoC1).
369. Peroxidase enzyme found in neutrophills
     is used for -
 a) Macrophage activation

 b) Chemotactic agent

 c) Microbial killing

 d) Vasodilatation



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Microbial killing
Peroxidase (myeloperoxidase) is involved in phagocytosis (microbial
killing).
370. Which one of the following statements is
     correct regarding chronic granulomatous
     disease ?
 a) It is an autosomal dominant disease

 b) It is characterized by abnormal bacterial phagocytosis

 c) Recurrent streptococcal infections are usual in this disease

 d) Nitrobluetetrazolium test is useful for screening



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Nitrobluetetrazolium test is useful for screening
Leukocytes from the patients of chronic granulomatous disease fail
to reduce nitroblue tetrazolium (NBT) during phagocytosis. This
property has been used as a screening method (NBT test) for the
diagnosis of chronic granulomatous disease.
Chronic granulomatous disease (CGD)
It is a group of disorders of granulocyte and monocyte oxidative
metabolism.
Inheritance
X-linked (Most common)
Autosomal recessive
Phagocytosis is normal but leukocytes do not undergo degranulation
following phagocytosis.
The diminished H202 production appears to be the major reason for
defective bactericidal defect.
Mutation in the genes for the four proteins that assemble at the
plasma membrane account for all patients with CGD:
Two proteins form the heterodimer cytochrome b - 558 in the plasma
membrane.
Two other proteins interact with cytochrome after cell activation to
form NADPH oxidase required for Hydrogen peroxide production.
The bacteria involved in recurrent infections are catalase positive
pyogenic pathogens such as staphylococci and coliforms. Catalase
negative pathogens such as streptococci and pneumococci are
handled normally.
There is excessive inflammation with granulomas formation.
371. Most common cause of chronic
     granulomatous disease in children is:
 a) Myeloperoxidase deficiency

 b) Defective phagocytosis

 c) Defective H2O2 production


 d) Job's disease



Correct Answer - C
Answer is C (Defective H2O2 production)
Chronic granulomatous disease is a 'disorder' of microbial killing'
characterized by decreased ability of neutrophils to produce H4)-Q
Chronic granulomatous disease is a 'disorder' of microbial killing' characterized by
decreased ability of neutrophils to produce H,O2.Q Patients, here become
susceptible to disease caused by organisms that produce `catalase', which destroy
the small amount of H2O, present in these cells and leads to failure of bacterial
killing.
The disease is called so, because granulomas, are formed in various tissues, as a
second line defence against organisms, that normally would be removed by the
acute inflammatory response.
Manifestations:
Recurrent infections with which catalase +ve Pyogenic bacteria e.g. staph/coliforms
Q
- catalase negative bacteria e.g. streptococcus, Pneumococcus are often handled
normally.Q
Normal humoral immune response? but
Defective killing process: Leucocytes are unable to kill bacteria after phagocytosis
the major reason being decreased production of H-O2.Q
Screening method:
NBT test: Nitroblue retrazolium dye is not reduced by neutrophils in vitro.
372. Delayed umbilical cord detachment
     leukocytosis is seen in?
 a) Leukocyte adhesion deficiency

 b) Chronic granulomatous disease

 c) Severe combined immunodeficiency

 d) None of the above



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Leukocyte adhesion deficiency
Leukocyte adhesion deficiency type 1 is a disorder that causes the
immune system to malfunction, resulting in a form of
immunodeficiency
One of the first signs of leukocyte adhesion deficiency type 1 is a
delay in the detachment of the umbilical cord stump after birth. In
newborns, the stump normally falls off within the first two weeks of
life; but, in infants with leukocyte adhesion deficiency type 1, this
separation usually occurs three weeks or later. Also, affected infants
often have inflammation of the umbilical cord stump (omphalitis) due
to a bacterial infection.
It's due to the absence of CD 18 antigen that's necessary for the
formation of integrins, the substances that are responsible for the
second step of leukocyte migration: adhesion. Because the
leukocytes cannot efficiently reach the site of insult, they cannot
engulf the offending substance, and no pus will be evident. Also, as
a compensatory mechanism, there may be excessive leukocytosis.
373. Decrease in plasma osmotic pressure is
     cause of edema in?
 a) CHF

 b) DVT

 c) Nephrotic syndrome

 d) None



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Nephrotic syndrome
Decreased plasma osmotic pressure of capillaries : It causes
decreases in inward drivingforce. It results from Hypoproteinemia.
When total plasma protein is below 5 gm/dl (normal 6-8 gm/d1) or
albumin is below 2.5 gm/dl (normal 3.5-5 gm/dl) edema takes place.
Conditions causing hypoproteinemia are nephrotic syndrome, liver
cirrhosis, protein losing enteropathy, and PEM.
374. Normal time taken for scar formation
     after injury is?
 a) 2 weeks

 b) 3 weeks

 c) 4 weeks

 d) 5 weeks



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. 4 weeks
Immediately after incision : Incision is filled with blood clot containing
fibin and blood cells (including ), dehydration of surface clot forms
scab on surface.
Within 24 hours : Neutrophils appear at the margin of wound, which
is filled with blood clot.
24-48 hours : Epithelial cells move from wound edges and fuse in
the midline beneath the surface scab, producing a continuous but
thin epithelium layer that closes the wound.
Day 3 : Neutrophils are replaced by macrophages, granulation tissue
appears, collagen fibers are present in the margin but do not bridge
the incision.
Day 5 : Abundant granulation tissue, maximum neovascularization,
abundant collagen which bridges the incision, the epidermis
recovers its normal thickness.
2nd week : Diappearance of leukocytes and edema, presence of
fibroblasts (derived from local mesenchyme) and maximum
collagen.
End of 1 month : There is scar which is made up of cellular
connective tissue devoid of inflammatory infiltrate covered now by
intact epidermis. There is replacement of collagen type III with
collagen type I.
collagen type I.
375. Which type of healing occurs in an
     incisional wound with infection?
 a) Primary

 b) Delayed primary

 c) Secondary

 d) Tertiary



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Secondary
Its produced by sharp cutting instruments-
knife,razor,blade,swords,chopper,axe etc.
Secondary healing occurs in an incisional wound with infection.
376. All of the following cell types undergo cell division, EXCEPT:
 a) Pericyte

 b) Cardiac muscle cell

 c) Smooth muscle cell

 d) Satellite cell of skeletal muscle



Correct Answer - B
Myocyte cell division in the human heart ceases a few weeks after
birth. Thereafter, enlargement of the heart is as a result of cell
hypertrophy or the laying down of collagen in the extracellular space.
DNA turnover is almost undetectable except in pathologic states.
Approximately 20% of myocytes in the human heart have two nuclei,
so that cell separation, rather than mitosis, could bring about a small
increase in the total cell number.
Ref: Francis G.S., Tang W., Walsh R.A. (2011). Chapter 26.
Pathophysiology of Heart Failure. In V. Fuster, R.A. Walsh, R.A.
Harrington (Eds), Hurst's The Heart, 13e.
377. Gene for embryogenic stem cell is -
 a) Oct-4

 b) Nanog

 c) GJA I

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. All of the above
A common subset of 92 genes was identified that included Nanog,
GTCM-1, connexin 43 (GJA1), oct-4, and TDGF1 (cripto)."
378. Complement mediated hypersensitivity
     reaction is?
 a) Type -1 hypersensitivity

 b) Type -2 hypersensitivity

 c) Type -4 hypersensitivity

 d) None



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Type -2 hypersensitivity
Type II reactions (Antibody mediated) → Involve immunoglobulin G
or Immunoglobulin M bound to cell surface antigen, with subsequent
complement fixation.
379. T-cell mediated disease is?
a) Asthma

b) Myasthenia gravis

c) SLE

d) Sarcoidosis



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Sarcoidosis
Type I (IgE mediated)
Eczema
Hay fever
Asthma
Atopy
Urticaria
Anaphylactic shock
Acute dermatitis
Theobald smith phenomenon
Prausnitz Kusnter (PK) reaction
Casonis test
Schultz-Dale phenomenon
Type II (IgG, IgM and complement mediated)
Blood transfusion reactions
Erythroblastosis fetalis
Autoimmune hemolytic anemia or thrombocytopenia or
agrnulocytosis4
Pemphigus vulgaris
Good pasture syndrome
Bullous pemphigoid
Pernicious anemia
Acute rheumatic fever
Diabetes mellitus
Graves disease
Myasthenia gravis
Type III (IgG, IgM, complement and leucocyte mediated)
Local-Arthus reaction
Systemic-serum sickness
Schick test
Polyarteritis nodosa (PAN)
Rheumatoid arthritis
SLE
Acute viral hepatitis
Penicillamine toxicity
Hyperacute graft rejection
380. Type 4 hypersensitivity reaction to TB
     antigen is similar to which of the
     following?
 a) Serum sickness

 b) Asthma

 c) Myasthenia gravis

 d) Temporal arteritis



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Temporal arteritis
Type IV (T-Cell mediated)
Tuberculin test
Lepromin test
Sarcoidosis
Tuberculosis
Contact dermatitis
Granulomatous inflammation
Type I lepra reaction
Patch test
Temporal arteritis
Jones mote reaction (cutaneous basophilic HSN)
Graft rejection
Fairleys test
Frie's test
381. Non IgE mediated anaphylactic reaction
     includes -
 a) Ig G

 b) Ig M

 c) Compliments

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. All of the above
Cytotoxic reactions can also cause anaphylaxis, via complement
activation. Antibodies (IgG and IgM) against red blood cells, as
occurs in a mismatched blood transfusion reaction, activate
complement. This reaction causes agglutination and lysis of red
blood cells and perturbation of mast cells resulting in anaphylaxis
382. True about MHC-class II -
 a) Not involved in innate immunity

 b) Cytotoxic T-cell involved

 c) Present in nucleated cells

 d) All



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., NOT involved in innate immunity
o MHC I and II are part of adaptive immunity. A major function of the
MHC molecule is to present the antigen to T cell that is part of
adaptive immunity.
Cytotoxic T cells are MHC - class I restricted.
MHC class II complex is found only on cells of the immune system
(class I is found on all nucleated cells and platelets.)
The antigens binding with MHC II molecule are presented to CD4+ T
cells. As discussed earlier, helper T cells/CD4 T cells are MHC II-
restricted.
B cells have both MHC class I and II complexes.
383. MHC1 is involved in?
 a) Tumor lysis

 b) Mixed leukocyte reaction

 c) Autoimmune disease susceptibility

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Tumor lysis
MHC class I molecules are present on all nucleated cells, all virus-
infected cells can be detected and eliminated by CD8+Cytotoxic T
lymphocytes.
MHC class I is responsible for graft rejection and cell-mediated
cytolysis of viral infected or tumor cells.
384. CD4 is associated with HLA?
 a) HLA 1

 b) HLA 2

 c) HLA 3

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. HLA 2
MHC-II recognizes exogenous antigen (extracellular microbes,
soluble proteins) and present it to CD4 helper T cells (MHC-II
restricted).
MHC class I present antigen to cytotoxic CD-8 T cells (MHC-I
restricted).
385. Memory cells are:
     September 2004
 a) Basophils

 b) Eosinophils

 c) Lymphocytes

 d) Neutrophils



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C i.e. Lymphocytes
386. Which of the following interleukin is
     secreted by T helper 2 cells?
 a) IL 11

 b) IL 7

 c) IL 1

 d) IL 13



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., IL 13
A) T helper - 1 (TF,') secretes 4 IL-2 and interferon - y
B)   T helper - 2 (T02) secretes -> IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, IL-13
387. All are true about Toll like receptors
     except?
 a) Recognize microbial molecules

 b) Activation of immune system

 c) Regulation of calcium channel

 d) Activation of transcription factors



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Regulation of calcium channel
Toll-like receptors (TLRs) are microbial sensors that are named for
the founding member called Toll, which was discovered
in Drosophila.
There are ten mammalian TLRs, which recognize products of
bacteria (such as endotoxin and bacterial DNA), viruses (such as
double-stranded RNA), and other pathogens (Fig. 2–3, A).
TLRs are located in plasma membranes and endosomes, so they
can detect extracellular and ingested microbes.
They are complemented by cytoplasmic and membrane molecules,
from several other families, that also recognize microbial products.
TLRs and the other receptors recognize products of different types
of microbes and thus provide defense against essentially all classes
of infectious pathogens.
Recognition of microbes by these receptors activates transcription
factors that stimulate the production of several secreted and
membrane proteins.
These proteins include mediators of inflammation, antiviral cytokines
(interferons), and proteins that promote lymphocyte activation and
even more potent immune responses.
388. Toll like receptors are seen on?
 a) Macrophages

 b) Natural killer cells

 c) Endothelial cells

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - D
Answer-D. All of the above
The Toll-like receptors are rnembrane proteins that recognize
avariety of microbe-derived molecules and stimulate innate immune
responses against the microbes.
The Toll-like receptors are expressed on many different cell types
that participate in innate immune responses including
,macrophages, dendritic cells, neutrophils, NKs cells, mucosal
epithelial cells and endothelial cells.
   389. The most common organ to be involved
        in the acute phase of Graft vs host
        disease is?
    a) Bone marrow

    b) Skin

    c) Liver

    d) Gut



   Correct Answer - B
   Answer- B. Skin
   Acute Graft vs host disease (occurring days to weeks after
   transplantation) causes epithelial cell necrosis in three principal
   target organs: liver, skin, and gut. Destruction of small bile ducts
   gives rise to jaundice, and mucosal ulceration of the gut results in
   bloody diarrhea. Cutaneous involvement is manifested by a
   generalized(maculopapular) rash.
   Histological findings are-
1. Perivascular mononuclear infiltrates.
2. Vacuolar degradation of dermo-epidermal junction.
3. Dyskeratotic cells or eosinophilic bodies in the epidermis.
4. Epidermolysis.
5. Denudation of epidermis (separation of the epidermis from the
   dermis).
390. Normal value of CD4:CD8 ratio is -
 a) 0.5

 b) 1

 c) 1.5

 d) 2



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. 2
A normal CD4/CD8 ratio is 2.0, with CD4 lymphocytes equal to or
greater than 400/mm3 and CD8 lymphocytes equal to 200 to
800/mm3.
391. More  than 90% patients of CREST syndrome with the limited cutaneous form
     of this disorder make which of the following autoantibodies?

 a) Anti-centromere

 b) Anti-DNA topoisomerase l

 c) Anti-double-stranded DNA

 d) Anti-Golgi



Correct Answer - A
All forms of scleroderma are thought to have a strong autoimmune component, and
glucocorticoids and azathioprine are used to suppress the inflammatory complications of
scleroderma.
(Other drugs that can be used in therapy include penicillamine, which inhibits collagen
cross-linking, NSAIDS for pain, and ACE inhibitors to protect the kidney if hypertension or
renal damage occurs).
The anti-centromere antibody is quite specific for CREST syndrome (96% of cases),
and is only seen in a minority of patients with diffuse scleroderma (mainly those with
Raynaud's phenomenon) and rarely in systemic lupus erythematosus and mixed connective
tissue disease.
Also know:
Anti-DNA topoisomerase I , also called anti-Scl-70 occurs commonly (64-75%) in diffuse
scleroderma, but only rarely in CREST syndrome.
Anti-double-stranded DNA is fairly specific for systemic lupus erythematosus, although it
only occurs in 50-60% of lupus cases.
Anti-Golgi antibodies are seen most often in systemic lupus erythematosus and Sjögren
syndrome.
Ref: Hellmann D.B., Imboden Jr. J.B. (2013). Chapter 20. Musculoskeletal & Immunologic
Disorders. In M.A. Papadakis, S.J. McPhee, M.W. Rabow (Eds),CURRENT Medical
Diagnosis & Treatment 2013.
392. Anti Jo-1 antibodies are a feature
     associated with?
 a) SLE

 b) Systemic sclerosis

 c) Polymyositis

 d) Rheumatoid arthritis



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Polymyositis
Anti-Jo-1 antibody is a myositis specific autoantibody most
commonly found in patients with idiopathic inflammatory myopathies
(UM).
393. HLA marker associated with diabetes
     mellitus type 1 is -
a) B 7

b) DR 4

c) DQ 3

d) DQ 4



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. DR 4
HLA associated with DM1 are DR3, DR4, DR8, DQ8.
394. Expression of a gene is known as?
 a) Genotype

 b) Phenotype

 c) Genome

 d) Morphology



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Phenotype
The genotype (The genetic makeup of an individual) of an organism
is the inherited map it carries within its genetic code.
The genotype is the part (DNA sequence) of the genetic makeup of
a cell. Genotype is one of three factors that determine phenotype,
the other two being inherited epigenetic factors, and non-inherited
environmental factors.
395. Group-D chromosome is?
 a) Chromosome 3

 b) Chromosome 6

 c) Chromosome 12

 d) Chromosome 15



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Chromosome 15
13-15- Six chromosomes slightly smaller than the C group with the
kinetochores in a near terminal position.
396. Acute intermittent porphyria is
     associated with which type of
     inheritance?
a) Autosomal dominant

b) Autosomal recessive

c) X-linked dominant

d) X-linked recessive



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Autosomal dominant
Metabolic
Familial hypercho-lesterolemia
Acute intermittent porphyria
397. Inheritance associated with congenital
     adrenal hyperplasia -
 a) AR

 b) AD

 c) XR

 d) XD



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. AR
Endocrine-
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia
Albinism
398. Inheritance associated with fragile X-
     syndrome is-
 a) Autosomal dominant

 b) Autosomal recessive

 c) X-linked dominant

 d) X-linked recessive



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. X-linked dominant
'None > c' i.e., X-linked dominant
The unstable triplet is transmitted in an X-linked inheritance but the
probabilities of different phenotypes are far from traditional X-linked
inheritance.
399. HOX gene is associated with
 a) Cranio-caudal development

 b) Brain development

 c) Teeth formation

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Cranio-caudal development
HOX genes (a subset of homeotic genes) are a group of related
genes that control the body plan of an embryo along the
cranio¬caudal (head-tail) axis.
400. Chromosome for ABO gene is?
 a) 9q

 b) 10p

 c) 11 q

 d) 12p



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. 9q
The ABO gene (Histo-blood group ABO system transferase enzyme)
resides on chromosome 9 at the band 9q34.2.
Histo-blood group ABO system transferase is
an enzyme with glycosyltransferase activity, which is encoded by
the ABO gene in humans. It is ubiquitously expressed in many
tissues and cell types.
401. Barr body is found in the following phase
     of the cell cycle:
 a) Interphase

 b) Metaphase

 c) GI phase

 d) Telophase



Correct Answer - A
A i.e. Interphase
The inactive X can be seen in the interphase nucleus as a darkly
staining small mass in contact with the nuclear membrane known as
the Barr body or X chromatin. Barr body is the inactivated X
chromosome. In non dividing interphase cells it remains tightly coiled
and can be seen as a dark staining body within the nucleus.
402. Trinucleotide sequence associated with
     spino-cerebellar ataxia is?
a) CTG

b) CUG

c) GGG

d) CAG



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. CAG
Huntington's disease (CAG repeat),
Spinocerebellar ataxia (CAG repeat),
Friedreich ataxia (GAA repeat),
Fragile-X-syndrome (GGG or GCC repeat),
Dystrophia myotonica (CTG/CUG repeat)
403. CA-125 is?
 a) Mucin glycoprotein

 b) Carcinoma transmigration antigen

 c) Mucopolysaccharide

 d) Lipid



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Mucin glycoprotein
* CA-125, which stands for “Cancer Antigen 125” also known as
mucin 16 or MUC16 is a protein that in humans is encoded by the
MUC16 which is a member of the mucin family glycoproteins.
* It is found in high amounts in the blood of patients with ovarian
cancer.
* CA-125 is produced on the surface of cells and is released in the
bloodstream.
* It is among the blood tests that may be ordered by a doctor if
ovarian cancer is suspected.
* CA-125 is also elevated in cancers of endometrium, cervix,
fallopian tubes, pancreas, breast, lung and colon.
* Non-neoplastic conditions causing elevation of CA-125 are
pregnancy, menstruation, endometriosis, PID, abdominal TB,
peritonitis and uterine fibroid.
* reference range: CA 125 is 0-35 units/mL (0-35 kU/L).
404. Elevated CA-125 are seen in -
 a) Abdominal TB

 b) Ca cervix

 c) Endometriosis

 d) All



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'a' i.e.,Abdominal TB; 'b' i.e., Ca cervix; 'c' i.e.,
Endometriosis
Elevated level of CA-125 is seen in
* Epithelial ovarian Cancer
* Non ovarian tumors :- Cancers of endometrium, cervix, fallopian
tubes, pancreas, breast, lung and colon.
* Non malignant conditions:- Pregnancy, mensturation, peritonitis,
endometriosis, pelvic inflammatory disease (abdominal TB) and
uterine fibroids.
405. Li-fraumani syndrome occurs due to
     mutation in gene?
 a) p53

 b) p16

 c) p41

 d) p12



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. p53
Li-Fraumeni syndrome is due to germ line mutation in p-53 gene.
406. Following genetic counselling in a family
     for Familial polyposis coli (FPC) next
     screening test is
 a) Flexible sigmoidoscopy

 b) Colonoscopy

 c) Occult blood in stools

 d) APC gene



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e. APC gene
Schwartz writes - "Flexible sigmoidoscopy of first-degree relatives of
FAP (Familial adenomatous polyposis) patients beginning at age 10
to 15 years has been the traditional mainstay of screening. Today
following genetic counselling, APC gene testing may be used to
screen family members providing an APC mutation has been
identified in a family member."
Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is a dominantly inherited
colon cancer syndrome due to germline mutations in the
adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) tumor suppressor gene on
chromosome 5.
Patients with this syndrome develop hundreds to thousands of
adenomas in the colon which if left untreated will eventually develop
into colon cancer.
Each of the FAP adenomas has lost the normal remaining allele of
APC gene but has not yet accumulated the required additional
mutations to generate fully malignant cells. In due course of time
many of these adenomas acquire further genetic abnormalities and
develop into fully malignant cancers. APC gene is thus considered to
be a gatekeeper for colon tumorigenesis.
The detection of APC gene mutation in family members of a FAP
patient helps in making a definitive diagnosis before the
development of polyps.
407. Most common tumor suppressor gene
     involved in cancer genesis is?
 a) Rb

 b) p53

 c) p16

 d) p73



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. p53
p-53 is the most common target for genetic alteration in human
tumors; A little over 50% of human tumors contain mutation in this
gene.
408. All are pre-malignant conditions except -
 a) Anaplasia

 b) Metaplasia

 c) Hamartoma

 d) Dysplasia



Correct Answer - C
A precancerous condition is a condition or lesion involving
abnormal cells that are associated with an increased risk of
developing into cancer. Clinically, precancerous conditions
encompass a variety of conditions or lesions with an increased risk
of developing into cancer.
Dysplasia is a broad term that refers to the abnormal development
of cells within tissues or organs. It can lead to a wide range of
conditions that involve enlarged tissue or pre-cancerous cells.
Anaplasia is a condition of cells with poor cellular differentiation,
losing the morphological characteristics of mature cells and their
orientation concerning each other and to endothelial cells. The term
also refers to a group of morphological changes in a cell
(nuclear pleomorphism, altered nuclear-cytoplasmic ratio, presence
of nucleoli, high proliferation index) that point to a possible malignant
transformation. Such loss of structural differentiation is especially
seen in most, but not all, malignant neoplasms.
A hamartoma is a benign (noncancerous) tumorlike malformation
made up of an abnormal mixture of cells and tissues found in areas
of the body where growth occurs. It is considered a developmental
error and can occur at several sites.
considering the above terms hamartoma is not a precancerous
condition
409. Soft wood exposure leads to -
 a) Nasal adenocarcinoma

 b) Skin cancer

 c) Liver cancer

 d) Bladder cancer



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Nasal adenocarcinoma
"There is little doubt that exposure to hard wood dusts (especially
that of beech 6, oak) in the furniture industry, as well as some
domestic softwood outside the industry, is associated with sino-
nasal cancers. Among the neoplasias, nasal adenocarcinoma is the
cancer most commonly found in wood workers."
410. At which cell cycle checkpoint is the cell
     cycle halted if the cell's DNA is
     damaged?
 a) G I - S

 b) S - G2

 c) G2 - M

 d) GO - GI



Correct Answer - A:C
Answer- (A) G I - S (C) G2 - M
The S phase is the point of no return in the cell cycle, and before the
cell makes the final commitment to replicate, the G ,/S checkpoint
checks for DNA damage. If DNA damage is present, the DNA repair
machinery and mechanisms that arrest the cell cycle are put in
motion. This causes delay at G iS checkpoint.
This check point in used for the repair of the DNA which is damaged
after its replication
411. Malignancy associated with
     hypercalcemia:
 a) Breast cancer

 b) Small cell lung cancer

 c) Non-small lung cancer

 d) Prostate cancer

 e) Multiple myeloma



Correct Answer - A:C:D:E
Answer- A,Breast cancer C,Non-small lung cancer D,Prostate
cancer E,Multiple myeloma
Lung carcinoma, breast carcinoma, and multlple myeloma account
for more than 50% of all cases of malignancy-associated
hypercalcemia.
Gastrointestinal tumars and prostate carcinoma are less common
causes of hypercalcemia.
412. AFP is raised in-
 a) Yolk sac tumor

 b) Seminoma

 c) Teratoma

 d) a and c



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Yolk sac tumor; 'c' i.e., teratoma
AFP is a glycoprotein synthesized normally early in fetal life by yolk
sac, fetal liver and fetal GIT. It is structurally and genetically related
to albumin.
AFP is raised in liver cancer (hepatocellular carcinoma), lung
carcinoma, pancreatic carcinoma,colon carcinoma, and non​‐
seminoma germ cell tumor of testis/ovary (yolk sac
tumor/endodermal sinus tumor, embryonal carcinoma, teratoma).
413. Immunohistochemical marker for
     sentinel node biopsy for breast
     carcinoma is?
a) Cytokeratin

b) Vimentin

c) Calretinin

d) CD45



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Cytokeratin
Cytokeratin - Carcinoma
  414. Scavenger receptors are for?
    a) Oxidized LDL

    b) Reduced LDL

    c) HDL

    d) VLDL



   Correct Answer - A
   Answer- A. Oxidized LDL
   Oxidized LDL has following effects
1. Ingested by macrophages through the scavenger receptor, distinct
   from LDL receptors, thus forming foam cells.
2. Increases monocyte accumulation in lesions.
3. Stimulates release of growth factors and cytokines.
4. Is cytotoxic to smooth muscle cells and endothelial cells
415. Causes of constrictive pericarditis is/are
     ?
 a) T.B.

 b) SLE

 c) Brucellosis

 d) a and b



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'a' i.e., T.B.; b' i.e., SLE
Causes of constrictive pericarditis
* Tuberculosis (most common cause)
* Pericardial malignancies (especially breast, lung)
* Post-viral pericarditis (especially hemorrhagic)
* Drugs (e.g. Hydralazine, Procainamide, minoxidil, phenytoin)
* Bacterial (purulent) pericarditis
* Trauma / post - cardiac surgery → haemopericardium
* Fungal pericarditis (Histoplasmosis)
* Connective tissue disorders (e.g. SLE, RA, Sarcoidosis)
* Parasitic pericarditis (toxoplasmosis, trichonosis)
* Dressler syndrome
* Mediastinal radiotherapy
* Renal failure
416. Characteristic histopathological feature
     of rheumatic heart failure is -
 a) Aschoff's nodule

 b) Mc Callumn patch

 c) Bread & butter pericarditis

 d) Shaggy vegetation



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Aschoff's nodule
Microscopically, Aschoff bodies are areas of inflammation of
the connective tissue of the heart, or focal interstitial inflammation.
Fully developed Aschoff bodies are granulomatous structures
consisting of fibrinoid change, lymphocytic infiltration,
occasional plasma cells, and characteristically
abnormal macrophages surrounding necrotic centers.
Some of these macrophages may fuse to form multinucleated giant
cells. Others may become Anitschkow cells or "caterpillar cells," so
named because of the appearance of their chromatin.
Myocardium involvement results in myocarditis with Aschoff bodies.
Endocardium involvement leads to the formation of small warty
projections (verrucae) along the line of closure of valvular leaflets,
mostly on the mitral valve.
They are pathognomic foci of fibrinoid necrosis found in many sites,
most often the myocardium. Initially, they are surrounded by
lymphocytes, macrophages, and a few plasma cells, but they are
slowly replaced by a fibrous scar. Aschoff bodies are found in all the
three layers of the heart, the least chance in the pericardium.
417. Prosthetic valves are predisposed to -
 a) Thromboembolism

 b) Infection

 c) Hemolysis

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. All of the above
Thrombo- embolic events
Bleeding
Prosthetic heart valve obstruction or stenosis
Prosthetic heart valve regurgitation (valvular and paravalvular)
Infective endocarditis
Hemolytic anemia
Patient-prosthesis mismatch.
418. Most frequent time period between
     myocardial infarction and subsequent
     myocardial rupture is -
 a) 3-4 days

 b) 4-8 days

 c) 1-3 weeks

 d) 3-6 weeks



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. 3-4 days
Myocardial rupture may occur almost anytime during 3 weeks after
acute myocardial infarction, but is most common between the first
and fourth days, when the infracted wall is weakest.
419. Infarcts involving which portion of the
     myocardium cause aneurysm as a post-
     MI complication-
 a) Subendocardial

 b) Anterior transmural

 c) Posterior transmural

 d) Inferior wall



Correct Answer - D
Answer. D. Inferior wall
Left ventricular aneurysm formation:
Left ventricular apical aneurysm formation usually occurs following
antero-apical myocardial infarction, after LAD occlusion.
This weakening of the apical wall results in an outpouching or
“dyskinesis” of the apex of the heart during systole.
420. In patients with hypertrophic
     cardiomyopathy maximum mutations are
     found in which gene:
 a) . β - myosin heavy chain

 b) Elastin

 c) . α - tropomyosin

 d) Troponin T



Correct Answer - A
β - Myosin heavy chain
Mutations in gene for β - Mysoin heavy chain are associated with
40% of the families with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
Troponin T mutations - 15% of the families α - tropomyosin
mutations ~5% of the families
   421. Mutation in protein associated with
        restrictive cardiomyopathy?
    a) Myosin regulatory proteins

    b) Myosin binding protein-C

    c) Troponin I

    d) Tropomyosin



   Correct Answer - C
   Answer- C. Troponin I
   RCM-associated mutations have been reported in four genes that
   encode key sarcomeric proteins/myofilaments
1. MYH7 gene - 13-Myosin heavy chain
2. TNNI3 gene - Cardiac troponin I type 3
3. TNNT2 gene - Cardiac troponin T type 2
4. ACTC gene - a- actin
   Mutations in the TNNI3 gene are one of the major causes of this
   condition. The TNNI3 gene provides instructions for making a
   protein called cardiac troponin I, which is found solely in the heart.
   Cardiac troponin I is one of three proteins that make up the troponin
   protein complex, which helps regulate tensing (contraction) and
   relaxation of the heart muscle.
   TNNI3 gene mutations associated with familial restrictive
   cardiomyopathy result in the production of a defective cardiac
   troponin I protein.
   The altered protein disrupts the function of the troponin protein
   complex and does not allow the heart muscle to fully relax. As a
   result, not enough blood enters the ventricles, leading to a buildup in
   the atria and lungs. The abnormal heart relaxation and blood flow is
   responsible for many of the signs and symptoms of familial
restrictive cardiomyopathy.
422. Takayasu arteritis mainly affects?
 a) Pulmonary artery

 b) Celiac artery

 c) Subclavian artery

 d) SMA



Correct Answer - C
Answer is C (Subclavian Artery):
Subclavian artery is the single most common artery involved in
Takayasu arteritis.
Takayasu arteritis : Most common sites affected
Takayasu arteritis typically involves medium and large sized arteries
It has a strong predilection for the aortic arch and its branches.
The involvement of the major branches of the aorta is much more
marked at their origin than distally
The most commonly affected arteries as seen by arteriography
in order of frequency
Coronary (<10%)
Vertebral (35%)
Coeliac axis (18%)
Pulmonary (10-40 %)
Superior Mesenteric (18%)
Iliac (17%)
Subclavian (93%)
Common Carotid (58%)
Abdominal Aorta (47%)
Renal (38%)
423. Strawberry gums are seen in
 a) Goodpasteur's syndrome

 b) Classic polyarteritis nodosa

 c) Wegener's granulomatosis

 d) Kawasaki syndrome



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Wegener's granulomatosis
Strawberry gums are seen in Wegner's granulomatosis.
Strawberry tongue is seen in Kawasaki disease.
424. Strawberry gingivitis seen in
 a) Myelocytic infiltration

 b) Phenytoin toxicity

 c) Wegner granulomatosis

 d) Klipel renaunay syndrome



Correct Answer - C
Wegener's granulomatosis [Ref: IADVL Textbook of Dermatology
3r9e p. 695]
Wegener's granulomatosis is known to cause oral mucosal lesions.
"Strawberry gingivitis is characteristic oral lesion associated with
wegener's granulomatosis".
Straberry gingivitis clinically presents with: ?
'Swollen erythematous gums clinically resembling overripe
strawberries"
Histologically strawberry gingivitis is characterized by
425. Heinz bodies are removed by?
 a) Macrophages

 b) Lymphocytes

 c) Neutrophils

 d) Fibroblasts



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Macrophages
* The unstable hemoglobins are those hemoglobin variants that
undergo denaturation and precipitation within the red cells as Heinz
bodies.
* They give rise to what is known as congenital non-spherocytic
hemolytic anemia or congenital Heinz body hemolytic anemia.
* These disorders have either autosomal dominant inheritance or
develop from spontaneous mutations.
* The unstable hemoglobins arise from either a single amino acid
substitution in the globin chain or due to deletion of one or more
amino acids within the β- globin chain so that the firm bonding of the
haem group within the molecule is disturbed leading to the formation
of methemoglobin and precipitation of globin chains as Heinz
bodies.
* Heinz bodies are not seen after the first one or two days since they
are removed by the spleen, leading to the formation of ‘bite cells’
and fragmented red cells.
* Macrophages detect the antigen and remove the damaged
portions of the cell, its damaged membrane, and the denatured
hemoglobin.
* These are associated clinically with congenital hemolytic anemia,
G6PD deficiency, hemolytic anemia secondary to drugs such as
phenacetin, some hemoglobinopathies (thalassemia), and after
splenectomy.
426. Not a feature of G-6PD deficiency?
 a) Intravascular hemolysis

 b) Oxidative stress

 c) Membrane defect

 d) Bite cells



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Membrane defect
* Among the defects in hexose monophosphate shunt, the most
common is G6PD deficiency.
* G6PD gene is located on the X chromosome and its deficiency is,
therefore, a sex (X)-linked trait affecting males, while the females
are carriers and are asymptomatic.
* PATHOGENESIS: Normally, red blood cells are well protected
against oxidant stress because of an adequate generation of
reduced glutathione via the hexose monophosphate shunt.
* Individuals with inherited deficiency of G6PD, an enzyme required
for hexose monophosphate shunt for glucose metabolism, fail to
develop adequate levels of reduced glutathione in their red cells.
* The clinical manifestations are those of acute hemolytic anemia
within hours of exposure to oxidant stress.
* The hemolysis is, however, self-limiting even if the exposure to the
oxidant is continued since it affects the older red cells only.
427. Gall stones in hemolytic anaemia are -
 a) Pigment

 b) Mixed

 c) Cholesterol

 d) Any type



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Pigment
428. Hypercoagulability due to defective
     factor V gene is called :
 a) Lisbon mutation

 b) Leiden mutation

 c) Antiphospholipid syndrome

 d) Inducible thrombocytopenia syndrome



Correct Answer - B
Answer is B (Leiden mutation)
Hyper coagulability due to defective Factor V gene is called 'Leiden
mutation' and is named after the city in which it was described.
Factor V Leiden
Factor V Leiden is a variant (mutated) of normal clotting factor V and
differs from normal clotting factor V by a single nucleotide.
While Factor V Leiden is completely normal in terms of its ability to
prevent bleeding, the one amino acid difference makes Factor V
Leiden resistant to being degraded by activated protein C and
protein S.
Consequently factor V Leiden persists in the circulation longer and
contributes to formation of blood clots.
Factor V Leiden mutation is the most common underlying genetic
cause of thrombophilia (venous thrombosis)
Factor V Leiden mutation poses a life long risk of deep venous
thrombosis.
429. Cryoprecipitate contains:
     March 2009
 a) Factor II

 b) Factor V

 c) Factor VIII

 d) Factor IX



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C: Factor VIII
Cryoprecipitate is prepared from plasma and contains fibrinogen,
von Willebrand factor, factor VIII, factor XIII and fibronectin.
Cryoprecipitate is the only adequate fibrinogen concentrate available
for intravenous use.
Cryoprecipitate is indicated for bleeding or immediately prior to an
invasive procedure in patients with significant hypofibrinogenemia (
Cryoprecipitate should not be used for patients with von Willebrand
disease or Hemophilia A (Factor VIII deficiency). It is not usually
given for Factor XIII deficiency, as there are virus-inactivated
concentrates of this protein available. Cryoprecipitate is sometimes
useful if platelet dysfunction associated with renal failure does not
respond to dialysis.
430. Which of the following is a pro-
     coagulant?
 a) Thrombomodulin

 b) Protein C

 c) Protein S

 d) Thrombin



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Thrombin
Various factors involved in coagulation cascodes are factor I
(fibrinogen); factor II (prothrombin); factor III (thromboplastin or
tissue factor); factor IV (calcium ions or Ca"); factor V (labile factor);
factor VI (accclerin); factor VII (stable factor or preaccelerin); factor
VIII (antihemophilic factor); factor IX (christmas factor); factor X
(stuart-prower factor); factor XI (plasma thromboplastin antecedent
or PTA); factor XII (Hageman factor); factor XIII (fibrin stabilizing
factor or Laki Lorand factor); HMWK (high molecular weight
kinogen); prekallikrein; kallikrein; and platelet phospholipids.
431. Which test is used for both intrinsic and
     common clotting pathways?
 a) Thrombin time

 b) Partial thromboplastin time

 c) Ristocetin agglutination test

 d) FDPs



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Partial thromboplastin time
1) Partial thromboplastin time (PTT) : It tests the intrinsic and
common coagulation pathways. So, a prolonged PTT can results
from deficiency of factor V, VIII (factor VIIIc, Von willebrand factor),
IX, X, XI, XII, prothrombin or fibrinogen.
432. Maximum life of transfused RBCs is
 a) 110-120 days

 b) 80-100 days

 c) 60-80 days

 d) 50-60 days



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. 80-100 days
Normal average life span of red blood cells in adults is about 120
days, whereas that of transfused RBCs is about 50-60 days"
After an RBC transfusion, the mean potential life span of RBC is 85
days with a mean half life of 43 ± 11 days.
433.          Hemolytic Uremic Syndrome is
                   characterized by ?
 a) Microangiopathic haemolytic anaemia

 b) Positive Coomb's test

 c) Thrombocytopenia

 d) a and c



Correct Answer - D
Ans is 'a' i.e., Microangiopathic hemolytic anemia; 'c' i.e.,
Thromhocytopenia
Hemolytic uremic syndrome
* Hemolytic uremic syndrome is characterized by the triad of :
  - Anemia (microangiopathic hemolytic anemia).
  - Renal failure (microangiopathy of kidney involving glomerular
capillaries and arterioles).
  - Thrombocytopenia (due to platelet consumption).
* Hemolytic uremic syndrome is most common is children under 2
years of age.
* It usually follows an episode of acute gastroenterities, often
triggered by E coli.
* The prodrome is usually of abdominal pain, diarrhoea and
vomiting.
* Shortly thereafter, signs and symptoms of acute hemolytic anemia,
thrombocytopenia and acute renal failure ensue. o Sometimes
neurological findings also occur. (But usually absent and
differentiate HUS from TTP.) o Rarely HUS may follow respiratory
tract infection.
Etiology
* Gastrointestinal infection in infants with the following organism :
* E coli, Shigella dysenteriae, Streptococouus pneumoniae
Hematological findings in a case of microangiopathic hemolytic
anemia :
* Presence of schistocytes (fragmented red cells). This is the
hallmark of microangiopathic hemolytic anemia. o Neutrophil
leukocytosis.
* Thrombocytopenia.
* Hemoglobinuria is mild to moderate with hemosiderinuria.
* Blood urea and serum creatinine levels are high.
* PT and APTT normal.
* Elevated serum LDH
434. All are true about thrombotic
     thrombocytopenic purpura except?
 a) Micro angiopathic hemolytic anemia

 b) Thrombocytopenia

 c) Normal complement level

 d) Grossly abnormal coagulation tests



Correct Answer - D
Ans: D. Grossly abnormal coagulation test [Ref: Robbin's 7m/e
p. 1010]
* Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP) is characterized by
the presence of widespread thrombosisthroughout the
microcirculation.
* The unique characteristic of these thrombi is that they are primarily
composed of plateletso with very little. fibrin in it.
* The consumption of platelet leads to thrombocytopenia and the
presence of intravascular thrombi causes microangiopathic
hemolytic anemiaQ and widespread organ dysfunction.
* You must have noticed that TTP and DIC share so many similar
features such as 4icrovascular occulsion and microangiopathic
hemolytic anemia,
But they are pathologically distinct. In TTP
* Activation of coagulation cascade is not of primary importance. The
thrombi present are essentially platelet thrombi, hence results of
laboratory tests of coagulation such as PT and PTT are usually
normal.
In D.I.C.
* The main defect is activation of coagulation system there fore PT
and PTT are abnormal.
* Patients with TTP are deficient in an enzyme called ADAMTSB.
This enzyme is also known as vWf in etalloprotease.
* This enzyme normally degrades very high molecular weight
multimers of von-Willebrand .factor. In the absence of this enzyme,
these multimers of vWF accumulate in plasma and under some
circumstances promote platelet macroaggregate.formation
throughout the microcirculation leading to symptoms of TTP.
* Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura is a thrombotic
microangiopathy.
* The other disorders which is included in this group include H. U.S.
* The diseases are characterized by widespread thrombosis in
microcirculation.
* The vessels which are involved are terminal arteriolesQ and
capillaries.
* These vessels have thrombi.
* The characteristic of this thrombus is that it is primarily a platelet
thrombusQ i.e. the thrombi is composed mainly of platelets and von
Wilebrand factor with very little fibrin in it.
Pathogenesis
* Patients with TTP are deficient in an enzyme called ADAMTSBQ.
(This enzyme is also known as vWf nielalloproteaSe.)
* This enzyme normally degrades very high molecular weight
multimers of von-Willebrand .factor. In the absence of this enzyme,
these multimers of vWF accumulate in plasma and under some
circumstances promote platelet macroaggregate formation
throughout the microcirculation leading to symptoms of TTP.
* Platelet associated immunoglobulin (IgG) and complement levels
are normal in T.T.P.
435. Left side shift in Arneth's count is seen
     in?
 a) Megaloblastic anemia

 b) Septicemia

 c) TB

 d) Liver disease



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. TB
Shift to left (hyperactive bone marrow)
Individuals who have a larger percentage of neutrophills with fewer
lobes (mainly NI & N2) have a left shift which can be indicative of
disease processes such as infections (pyogenic and TB), malignant
tumors, hemolytic crises, myocardial infarction, acidosis, irradiation
etc.
436. Most common heavy chain disease is
 a) Franklin disease

 b) Seligmann disease

 c) Mu heavy chain disease

 d) Waldenstrom cryoglobulinemia



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Seligmann Disease (Alpha heavy chain disease)
There are four forms:
* Alpha chain disease (Seligmann's disease)- most common type
* Gamma chain disease (Franklin's disease)
* Mu chain disease
* Delta chain disease
437. Dutcher bodies are seen in?
 a) Brain

 b) Liver

 c) Spleen

 d) Bone marrow



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Bone marrow
Dutcher bodies, which are attributed to immunoglobulin filled
cytoplasm invaginating into the nucleus creating the appearance of
an intranuclear inclusion.
Dutcher bodies are described as intranuclear inclusions in patients
with Waldenstrom’s macroglobulinemia.
The inclusions are positive on a periodic acid-Schiff reaction and
were present in the cytoplasm as well as the nucleus.
They identified the inclusions as glycoprotein and postulated that
they might be chemically identical to the macroglobulin in the
plasma.
438. Gamma gandy bodies are seen in all
     except ?
 a) Cirrhosis with portal hypertension

 b) Chronic myeloid leukemia

 c) Sickle cell anemia

 d) Thalassemia



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Thalassemia
Gandy-Gamma bodies are foci of fibrosis containing iron and
calcium salts deposits on connective tissue and elastic fibres.
Gandy-Gamma bodies are seen in congestive splenomegaly e.g.,
in sickle cell anemia, CML and liver cirrhosis.
439. All of the following statements about
     Burkitt's lymphoma are true, Except:
 a) B cell lymphoma

 b) 8, 14 translocation

 c) Can present as an abdominal mass

 d) Radiotherapy is the treatment of choice



Correct Answer - D
Answer is D (Radiotherapy is the treatment of choice)
The treatment of choice for Burkitt's Lymphoma is chemotherapy
and not Radiotherapy.
'Burkitt's lymphoma responds well to short term high dose
chemotherapy. Treatment of Burkitt's lymphoma in both children and
adults should begin within 48 hours of diagnosis and involves the
use of intensive combination chemotherapy regimens' – Harrisons
Burkitt's Lymphoma is a B cell lymphoma
Burkitt's Lymphoma are tumors of mature B cells – Robbins 7th/677
t (8;14) translocation is the most common translocation in Burkitt's
Lymphoma Burkitt's lymphomas are associated with translocation of
the c-MYC gene on chromosome 8. Translocation
t (8; 14)
t (8; 22)
t (2; 8)
Burkitt's Lymphoma may present with an abdominal mass
Most Burkitt's Lymphoma presents at extranodal sites but may
present with lymphadenopathy
Extranodal sites of involvement include the mandible and abdominal
viscera
`Burkitt's Lymphomas may present with peripheral lymphadenopathy
               or an intraabdominal mass' – Harrison
CNS involvement is frequent
The disease is rapidly progressive and has a propensity to
metastasize to CNS, prophylactic therapy to CNS is therefore
mandatory.
Burkitt's Lymphoma is the most rapidly progressive human tumor
440. Oncogene associated with burkitt's lymphoma is:
 a) BCL-1, IgH

 b) BCL-2, IgH

 c) C-MYC

 d) ALK



Correct Answer - C
 Disease Cytogenetic Abnormality Oncogene


 Mantle cell lymphoma                     t(11;14)(q13;q32)   BCL-1, IgH

 Follicular lymphoma                      t(14;18)(q32;q21)   BCL-2, IgH

 Diffuse large cell lymphoma              t(3;-)(q27;-)       BCL-6
                                          t(17;-)(p13;-)      p53

 Burkitt's lymphoma, Burkitt's            t(8;-)(q24;-)       C-MYC
 leukemia

 CD30+ Anaplastic large cell              t(2;5)(p23;q35)     ALK
 lymphoma

 Lymphoplasmacytoid lymphoma              t(9;14)(p13;q32)    PAX5, IgH

Ref: Harrison, E-18,P-921
441. Cag A gene is associated with
 a) Hepatocellular carcinoma

 b) Esophageal carcinoma

 c) MALT lymphoma

 d) Lung carcinoma



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. MALT lymphoma
CagA, A gene that codes for an immunodominant antigen, is present
only in Helicobacter pylori strains that are associated with severe
forms of the gastroduodenal disease (type I strains).
Helicobacter pylori is a microaerophilic spiral-shaped lophotrichous
Gram-negative bacterium that colonizes the gastric lumen of
primates, including humans.
H pylori was identified as the cause of chronic active gastritis and
peptic ulcer disease in humans and is considered to be a risk factor
for the development of gastric adenocarcinoma and MALT
lymphoma
442. Richter’s syndrome refers to which of the following malignant
     transformation?

 a) CLL evolving into aggressive lymphoma

 b) Hairy cell leukemia evolving to AML

 c) Blast crisis in CML

 d) Splenic infiltration in NHL



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. CLL evolving into aggressive lymphoma
Richter's transformation or Richter's syndrome is a complication
of B cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) or hairy cell leukemia
(HCL) in which the leukemia changes into a fast-growing diffuse
large B cell lymphoma.
443. Basophillic leucocytosis occurs in -
 a) AML

 b) ALL

 c) CML

 d) CLL



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., CML
444. TEL-AML 1 fusion is associated with?
 a) CLL

 b) CML

 c) ALL

 d) AML



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. ALL
TEL-AML 1 gene fusion is the most common genetic alteration in
childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia. It is created by balanced
translocation t (12 : 21).
Cytogenetic abnormalities associated with ALL are gain of function
mutation in NOTCH-1 gene in T-cell ALL.
445. Granulomatous lung disease is caused
     by?
 a) Hypersensitivity pneumonitis

 b) Sarcoma

 c) Bronchogenic carcinoma

 d) Bronchogenic cyst



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Hypersensitivity pneumonitis
Granulomatous lung disease refers to a broad group of infectious
and well as noninfectious conditions characterized by the formation
of granulomas.
Infectious : Mycobacterial (TB & Non-TB); Fungal infection
(cryptococcus, Histoplasma, Blastomycosis, Coccidioidomycosis,
Aspergillosis); Parasitic Infections.
Non-infectious: Sarcoidosis; Wegner granulomatosis; Churg Strauss
syndrome; Chronic granulomatous disease; Hypersensitivity
pneumonitis; RA; Chronic Aspiration Pneumonitis; Langerhans Cell
Histiocytosis; substances (Talc Granulomatosis, Berylliosis)
446. Terminal stage of pneumonia is
 a) Congestion

 b) Red hepatization

 c) Gray hepatization

 d) Resolution



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Resolution
In the usual course of pneumonia, final stage is resolution.
However, in some neglected cases following complications may
develop -
Abscess formation Pleural effusion, pleuritis
Empyema                Becteremic dissemination       Brain abscess,
endocarditis, meningitis,
Organization           supurrative arthritis.
Pathological changes of bacterial pneumonia
A.Lobar pneumonia
Large confluent area of the lung or entire lobes are consolidated.
The lower lobes are affected most commonly.
There are four stages of the inflammatory response (Laennec's
stages) ?
1. Stage of congestion (initial phase)
The affected lobe is enlarged, heavy, dark red and congested.
Cut surface exudes blood-stained frothy fluid.
There is dilatation and congestion of alveolar capillaries.
There are few neutrophils and numerous bacteria in the alveolar
fluid.
2. Stage of red hepatization (early consolidation)
The term hepatization refers to liver-like consistency of the affected
lobe on cut section.
The affected lobe is red and firm.
The edema fluid of preceding stage is replaced by strands of fibrin.
There is marked cellular exudate of neutrophils with extravasation of
red cells.
3. Stage of gray hepatizatioa (late consolidation)
The affected lobe is grayish brown, firm and dry.
The fibrin strand are dense and more numerous.
There is progressive disintigration of red cells and neutrophils.
The macrophages begin to appear in the exudate.
The organisms are less numerous and appear as degenerated
forms.
4. Resolution
The previously solid and fibrinous constituent is liquefied by
enzymatic action.
Granular and fragmented strands of fibrin in the alveolar spaces are
seen due to progressive enzymatic digestion.
There is progressive removal of fluid content as well as cellular
exudate from the air spaces, resulting in restoration of normal lung
parenchyma with areation.
B.Bronchopneumonia
Patchy areas of red or grey consolidation, more often multilobar and
frequently bilateral and basal (lower zones) because of tendency of
secretions to gravitate into lower lobes..
There is suppurative exudate, consisting chiefly neutrophils, filling
bronchi, bronchioles and adjacent alveolar spaces.
Alveolar septa thicken due to congested capillaries and leucocytic
infiltration.
447. Pink puffers are associated with?
 a) Emphysema

 b) Chronic bronchitis

 c) Pneumonia

 d) Bronchiectasis



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Emphysema
A "pink puffer" is a person where emphysema is the primary
underlying pathology
In emphysema, not only there is less surface area for gas exchange,
there is also less vascular bed for gas exchange. . The body then
has to compensate by hyperventilation (the "puffer").
Have less hypoxemia (compared to blue bloaters) and appear to
have a "pink" complexion and hence "pink puffer".
448. Most common cancer found in coal mine
     workers
 a) Anal canal

 b) Testicular

 c) Lung

 d) Liver



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Lung
Among coal worker pneumoconiosis patients standard incidence
ratio of various important carcinomas : ovary (2.0) > esophagus
(1.76) Lung > (1.45) > Stomach (1.42) > Liver (1.18) > kidney (1.06)
> prostate (1.02) > colorectal (1.00) > urinary bladder (0.91) > head
& neck (0.87)
449. In allergic bronchopulmonary
     aspergillosis, the location of lesions is
 a) Pleura

 b) Bronchi and bronchioles

 c) Alveoli

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Bronchi and bronchioles
Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (ABPA) is a condition
characterized by a hypersensitivity response to the Aspergillus (most
commonly Aspergillus fumigatus).
An allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis is a form of lung disease
that occurs in some people who are allergic to Aspergillus.
With ABPA, this allergic reaction causes the immune system to
overreact to Aspergillus leading to lung inflammation.
ABPA causes bronchospasm (tightening of airway muscles) and
mucus buildup resulting in coughing, breathing difficulty and airway
obstruction.
it also causes airway inflammation, leading to bronchiectasis—a
condition marked by abnormal dilation of the bronchi and
bronchioles.
450. Deficiency of p53 mutation is maximum
     in which lung carcinoma?
 a) Small cell carcinoma

 b) Squamous cell carcinoma

 c) Adenocarcinoma

 d) Lymphoma



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Squamous cell carcinoma
-MYC and RB - small cell cancer
RAS and p16 - non-small cell cancer
p53 - both small and non-small cell, but highest in squamous cell
carcinoma
K-RAS –adenocarcinoma
451. Metastasis to lungs come most
     commonly from
 a) Breast carcinoma

 b) Brain carcinoma

 c) Bone carcinoma

 d) Melanoma



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Breast carcinoma
Metastatic tumor to lung originate from carcinoma in the breast,
colon, stomach, pancreas, kidney, prostate, liver, thyroid, adrenal,
male genital tract and female genital tract.
452. Which type of paraneoplastic syndrome
     is most commonly associated with lung
     carcinoma?
 a) SIADH

 b) Gynaecomastia

 c) Acanthosis nigricans

 d) Hypocalcaemia



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. SIADH
SIADH is the most common paraneoplastic syndrome associated
with lung carcinoma as Small cell carcinoma is the most common
type of lung cancer associated with ectopic hormone production and
paraneoplastic syndrome and ADH (Causing SIADH), ACTH
(Causing cushingsyndrome) production are predominantly
associated small cell carcinoma.
453. Most common cause of chylothorax is?
 a) Trauma

 b) Lymphoma

 c) Left-sided heart failure

 d) Infections



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Lymphoma
Chylothorax is a pleural collection of a milky lymphatic fluid
containing micro globules of lipid.
 It results from lymph formed in the digestive system called chyle
accumulating in the pleural cavity due to either disruption or
obstruction of the thoracic duct.
The total volume of fluid may not be large, but chylothorax is always
significant because it implies obstruction of the major lymph ducts,
usually by intrathoracic cancer like primary or secondary mediastinal
neoplasm, such as lymphoma.
454. True Statement about silicosis -
 a) Produces pleural plaque

 b) Associated with tuberculosis

 c) Lower lobe infiltration

 d) All



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Associated with tuberculosis
Silicosis
3 Silicosis is a lung disease caused by inhalation of crystalline
silicon dioxide (silica).
* Currently, it is the most prevalent occupational disease in the
world.
* Silicosis is a slowly progressive disease, usually presenting after
decades of exposure as slowly progressive nodular fibrosing
pneumoconiosis.
* Silica occurs in both crystalline and amorphous forms but
crystalline forms are much more fibrogenic. The crystalline form are
quartz, crystobalite.
* Silicosis is characterized in its early stages by nodules in the upper
zones of the lung. As the disease progresses these nodules may
coalesce into hard collagenous scars.
* Fibrotic lesions occur in the hilar lymph node and pleura.
Sometimes thin sheets of calcification occur in the lymph nodes and
are seen radiographically as eeg shell calcification i.e. (calcium
surrounding a zone lacking calcification.
* It the disease continues to progress, expansion and coalescence
of lesions produce progressive massive fibrosis. o Histologically the
lesions of silicosis consists of concentric layers of hyalinized
collagen surrounded by a dense capsule of more condensed
collagen.
* Examination of the nodules by polarized microscopy reveals the
birefringent silica particles.
* Silicosis is associated with an increased susceptibility to T.B. It is
postulated that silicosis results in depression of cell mediated
immunity and the crystalline silica may inhibit the ability of
pulmonary macrophages to kill phagocytosed mycobacteria.
* Nodules of silicotuberculosis often display a central zone of
caseation.
455. Most common type of pneumoconiosis,
     associated with TB is?
 a) Silicosis

 b) Bysinosis

 c) Asbestosis

 d) Baggassosis



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Silicosis
Silicosis is associated with increased susceptibility to T.B.
It is postulated that silicosis results in a depression of cell-mediated
immunity, and crystalline silica may inhibit the ability of pulmonary
macrophages to kill phagocytosed mycobacteria.
Nodules of silicotuberculosis often contain a central zone of
caseation.
456. On polarising microscopy, refractile
     body in the centre of granuloma is seen
     in?
 a) Sarcoidosis

 b) Silicosis

 c) Tuberculosis

 d) Asbestosis



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Silicosis
Histologically the lesions of silicosis consist of concentric layers of
hyalinized collagen surrounded by a dense capsule of more
condensed collagen. Examination of the nodules by polarized
microscopy reveals the birefringent silica particles.
457. Anthracosis is due to inhalation of-
 a) Coal dust

 b) Asbestos

 c) Silica dust

 d) Berylium dust



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Coal dust
Coal worker's pneumoconiosis (Black lung)
Black lung disease, also known as coal worker's pneumoconiosis
(CWP), is caused by long exposure to coal dust. o Coal worker's
pneumoconiosis has following spectrum.
1. Asymptomatic anthracosis
* Inhaled carban pigment is engulfed by alveolar or interstitial
macrophages, which then accumulate in the connective tissue along
the lymphatics.
* Patient is completely asymptomatic.
2. Simple coal worker's pneumoconiosis
* Characterized by coal macules (composed of carbon laden
macrophages) and coal nodules (carbon laden macrophages +
collegen).
* The upper lobes and upper zones of the lower lobes are involved.
* They are located primarily adjacent to respiratory bronchioles, the
site of initial dust accumulation.
* Centriacinar emphysema may develop.
3. Complicated coal worker's pneumoconiosis
* Requires many years to develop.
* Characterized by intensely blackened multiple scar larger than 2
cms. o This is also known as Progressive massive fibrosis.
Remember
* In CWP and silicosis upper zones of lung are involved initially. o In
asbestosis lower lung fields are involved initially.
458. Chronic bronchitis is associated with?
 a) Increase in number of glands without any change in size

 b) Bronchiolitis obliterans

 c) Decrease in Reid index

 d) Only large airways are involved



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Bronchiolitis obliterans
The earliest feature of chronic bronchitis is hypersecretion of mucus
in the larger airways, associated with hypertrophy of submucosal
gland of trachea and bronchi.
Later, small airways (small bronchi and bronchioles) are also
involved and show goblet cell hyperplasia, and intraluminal and
peribronchial fibrosis.
In most severe cases, there may be oblitration of lumen due to
fibrosis → Bronchiolitis obliterans.
459. Histopathology showing large cells with
     plant like apperance with perinuclear
     halo is seen in which type of renal cell
     carcinoma ?
 a) Onchocytoma

 b) Granular cell carcinoma

 c) Angiosarcoma

 d) Chromophobic



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Chromophobic
Histopathological findings of perinuclear halo and plant cell
appearance are seen in chromophobe cell carcinoma ofRCC.
Electron microscopic finding consisting of numerous 150-300 nm
microvesicles is the single most distinctive and defining feature of
chromophobe cell ca.
460. True about RCC is?
 a) Most common site is lower lobe of kidney

 b) Most common variety is papillary type

 c) Invasion of renal vein is more common than renal artery

 d) Most common site of metastasis is lymph nodes



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Invasion of renal vein is more common than renal
artery
Renal cell carcinoma is the most common malignant tumor of
kidney. It occurs usually in 6th and 7th decade of life. There is male
preponderance.
Important risk factors for RCC are smoking (most significant),
obesity, hypertension, asbestos exposure, estrogen therapy, CRF,
tuberous sclerosis and familial conditions (Von Hippel-Lindau
syndrome).
RCC is an adenocarcinoma and most commonly arises from upper
pole.
The one of the striking characteristics of RCC is to invade renal vein
and is associated with poor prognosis.
461. Strawberry gall bladder is seen in
 a) Cholesterosis

 b) Primary sclerosing cholangitis

 c) Cholestasis

 d) Primary billiary cirrhosis



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Cholesterosis
In Cholesterosis, there are deposits of cholesterol in the epithelial
cells and in the submucosal macrophages. This gives appearance of
multiple small yellow spots on a red hyperplastic muscosa, the
straberry gallbladder.
462. What is responsible for regeneration of
     liver cells?
 a) HGF

 b) VEGF

 c) TGF-13

 d) IFN-y



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. HGF
Hepatocyte growth factor (HGF/scatter factor) levels rise to high
levels soon after partial hepatectomy. This is the only factor tested
that acts by itself as a potent mitogen for isolated hepatocytes
cultured in vitro. This factor is also of critical importance in
development of the liver, as target deletions of its gene lead to fetal
death due to hepatic insufficiency.
463. Bridging necrosis is characteristically seen in:
 a) Acute hepatitis

 b) Chronic hepatitis

 c) Both of the above

 d) None of the above



Correct Answer - C
Ans: C. Both of the above
Bridging necrosis is a more severe form of hepatocellular injury in
acute viral hepatitis and may progress to fulminant hepatitis or
chronic hepatitis. Bridging necrosis is characterized by bands of
necrosis linking portal tracts to central hepatic veins, one central
hepatic vein to another, or a portal tract to another tract.
In severe cases of acute hepatitis, confluent necrosis of hepatocytes
may lead to bridging necrosis connecting portal-to-portal, central-to-
central, or portal-to-central regions of adjacent lobules.
Hepatocyte swelling and regeneration compress sinusoids, and the
more or less radial array of hepatocyte plates around terminal
hepatic veins are lost.
Bridging fibrosis is an important component of severe examples of
chronic viral hepatitis and steatohepatitis.
464. The zonal necrosis most commonly
     affected in chronic passive hepatic
     congestion is?
 a) Central

 b) Peripheral

 c) Mid zonal

 d) None



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Central
Centrilobular hemorrhagic necrosis is caused by chronic passive
congestion (CPC) due to right heart failure.
465. Normally squamo-columnar junction is
     usually located at
 a) Distal 2-3 cms of esophagus

 b) Proximal 2-3 cms of stomach

 c) In esophagus more than 3cms proximal to GEJ

 d) None of the above



Correct Answer - B
Answer- A. Distal 2-3 cms of esophagus
Proximal extension of the squamocolumnar junction beyond the
distal 2-3 cms of oesphagus is abnormal and is suggestive of
Barrett's esophagus.
466. Carcinoma associated most commonly
     with upper one third of esophagus is
 a) Adenocarcinoma

 b) Squamous cell Carcinoma

 c) Adeno-squamous Carcinoma

 d) Leiomyosarcoma



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Squamous cell Carcinoma
Squamous cell carcinoma is the most common type of esophageal
carcinoma worldwide and in India. It usually occurs in middle 1/3rd
(mot common) and upper 1/3' of esophagus. Some may also arise in
lower 1/3
467. Autoimmune gastritis is associated with
     deficiency of vitamin?
 a) A

 b) B12

 c) C

 d) D



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. B12
In autoimmune gastritis, two important auto antibodies causing
damage are anti-parietal cell antibodies (most common) and
antibodies against intrinsic factor; anti-IF (most specific).
Vitamin B-12 deficiency and pernicious anemia : Due to deficiency of
IF cells (secreted by parietal cells) as well as damage of IF by anti-IF
antibodies.
468. Blood group most commonly associated
     with gastric carcinoma is?
 a) Blood Group 0

 b) Blood group A

 c) Blood group AB

 d) Blood group B



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Blood group A
Genetic factors : Blood group A, Hereditary nonpolyposis colon
cancer syndrome (HNPCC) and Familial gastric cancer syndrome
(E-cadherin mutation).
469. Which disease is diagnosed by jejunal
     biopsy?
 a) Celiac disease

 b) Intestinal lymphoma

 c) Argentaffinoma of intestine

 d) Tropical sprue



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Intestinal lymphoma
the jejunal biopsy is useful in the diagnosis of the following
disorders:
Intestinal lymphoma
Intestinal lymphangiectasia
Eosinophilic gastroenteritis
Amyloidosis
Crohn's disease
Infection by one or more
microorganisms
Mastocytosis
Whipple's disease
470. commonest benign tumor of the
     esophagus?
a) Leiomyoma

b) Papilloma

c) Adenoma

d) Hemangioma



Correct Answer - A
Ans is a. i.e. Leiomyoma
"Leiomyomas constitute more than 50% of benign esophageal
tumors "-Schwartz
471. Total colonic aganglionosis is a variant
     of?
 a) Crohn's disease

 b) Ulcerative colitis

 c) Hirschsprung's disease

 d) Tropical sprue



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Hirschsprung's disease
Hirschprung disease (Congenital aganglonic megacolon) is caused
by defective migration of neural crest into the mesodermal layer of
gut. There is aganglionosis (absence of ganglions) in a portion of
intestinal tract. Intestinal segment lacks both Meissner submucosal
and Auerbach myenteric plexuses.
472. APC gene is involved in?
 a) Colorectal carcinoma

 b) Gastric carcinoma

 c) Gastric lymphoma

 d) Esophageal adenocarcinoma



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Colorectal carcinoma
 The APC protein is a negative regulator that controls beta-
catenin concentrations and interacts with E-cadherin, which are
involved in cell adhesion.
Mutations in the APC gene may result in colorectal cancer
473. Vitamin deficiency associated with cystic
     fibrosis is
 a) K

 b) B6

 c) C

 d) B12



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. B12
Patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) are at risk of developing
deficiencies of fat-soluble vitamins (A, D, E, and K) because of
pancreatic insufficiency, hepatobiliary disease, or both.
474. False about Patterson-Kelly-Brown
     syndrome is?
a) Anemia

b) Esophageal webs

c) Glossitis

d) Risk factor for adenocarcinoma



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Risk factor for adenocarcinoma
Plummer-Vinson syndrome (PVS) (Paterson-Brown-Kelly syndrome
or sideropenic dysphagia), is characterized by difficulty in
swallowing, iron deficiency anemia ,glossitis, chielosis, and
esophageal webs.
475. Most common site for carcinoma
     pharynx in females suffering from
     plummer vinson syndrome is
 a) Post cricoid region

 b) Posterior wall

 c) Lateral wall

 d) Pyriformis fossa



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Post cricoid
Plummer-Vinson syndrome
Plummer-Vinson syndrome, also known as Brown-Kelly-Paterson
syndrome or sederopenic dysphagia, seen in middle aged
edentulous women.
The plummer Vinsion Paterson Brown Kelly Syndrome is
characterized by : -
Dysphagia
Chronic iron deficiency anemia
Atrophic oral mucosa and glossitis
Brittle, spoon-shaped fingernails (Koilonychia)
The cause of dysphagia is usually a cervical esophageal web, but
abnormal pharyngeal and esophageal motility may play a role.
The syndrome characterstically occurs in middle aged edentulous
(without teeth) women.
It is a premalignant lesion. Approximately 10% of patient develop
squamous cell Ca of esophagus, oral cavity or the hypopharynx.
As iron-deficiency anemia is a common finding, it is also known as
sideropenic dysphagia.
Carcinoma develops in post-cricoid region.
476. Commonest
     following?
                carcinoma that can cause splenic metastasis is which of the



 a) Ca. Pancreas

 b) Ca. Stomach

 c) Ca. Ovary

 d) Ca. Cervix



Correct Answer - C
Although isolated metastasis to spleen is rare, studies found the most common primary
neoplasms with splenic metastasis to be gynecologic (61%), with majority being ovarian,
colorectal (15%), lung (9%), and stomach (4%).
Ref: CT and MRI of the Abdomen and Pelvis: A Teaching File edited by Pablo R. Ros,
Koenraad J. Mortele, 2006, Page 218.
477. Phlegmonous gastritis occurs due to?
 a) H. pylori

 b) E. coli

 c) C. jejuni

 d) Cl. Tetani



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. E. coli
Most cases of phlegmonous gastritis are due to alpha-hemolytic
streptococci, although pneumococci, staphylococci, Escherichia coli,
and rarely, Proteus Vulgaris and Clostridium welchii can be the
causative organisms.
478. Collar button ulcer is found in?
 a) Ulcerative colitis

 b) Crohn's disease

 c) Shigella

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. All of the above
"Collar button ulcers", a radiological sign, are manifestations of
inflammatory processes within the bowel.
Collar button ulcers have also been observed in the setting of other
inflammatory bowel processes, such as Crohn's disease, ischemic
colitis, and shigellosis.
479. Which  of the following would be the best morphological feature to
     distinguish ulcerative colitis from Crohn's disease?

 a) Diffuse distributions of pseudopolyps

 b) Mucosal edema

 c) Crypt abscesses

 d) Lymphoid aggregates in the mucosa



Correct Answer - A
Pseudopolyps are more commonly found in ulcerative colitis than Crohn's disease.
These are discrete areas resulting from surviving islands of mucosa or heaped up
granulation tissue.
Since in ulcerative colitis there is diffuse mucosal inflammation these pseudopolyps are
diffusely distributed.
Distinguishing features between Ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease:


                               Ulcerative colitis     Crohn’s disease

 Rectal involvement            Yes                    Variable

 Distribution                  Diffuse                Segmental or diffuse

 Terminal ileum                Backwash ileitis       Thickened and stenosis

 Serosa                        Normal                 Creeping fat

 Mucosa                        Hemorrhagic            Cobblestone and linear ulcers

 Pseudopolyps                  Frequent               Less common

 Strictures                    No                     Common

 Fistulas                      No                     Common

 Lymphoid hyperplasia          Infrequent             Common

 Crypt abscess                 Extensive              Focal
Ref: Pediatric Inflammatory Bowel Disease By Petar Mamula page 227.
480. Penile carcinoma is usually?
 a) Squamous cell carcinoma

 b) Basal cell carcinoma

 c) Adenocarcinoma

 d) Small cell carcinoma



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Squamous cell carcinoma
Most of penile cancers are squamous cell carcinoma and arise on
glans or inner surface of prepuce.
481. Stain used for staining the nucleus is?
 a) Safranin

 b) Fast green

 c) Hematoxylin

 d) Erythrosine



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Hematoxylin
Hematoxylin stains the cell nucleus and other acidic structures (such
as RNA-rich portions of the cytoplasm and the matrix of hyaline
cartilage) blue, while eosin stains cytoplasm, connective tissue and
other extracellular substances pink or red.
482. All are associated with diabetic gangrene
     except?
 a) Wet gangrene

 b) Dry gangrene

 c) Gas gangrene

 d) Fournier's gangrene



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Gas gangrene
It is a bacterial infection that produces gas within tissues. It can be
caused by Clostridium, most commonly alpha toxin producing
Clostridium perfringens, or various non-clostridial species.
483. Choroid metastasis is associated most
     commonly with?
 a) Gastric carcinoma

 b) Renal carcinoma

 c) Brain tumor

 d) Bone tumor



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Renal carcinoma
Tumors most likely to metastasize to the choroid plexus are renal
cell carcinoma and lung cancer. Other tumors with documented
spread to the choroid plexus include colon, gastric, breast, thyroid,
and bladder cancers, melanoma and lymphoma.
484. Which of the following statements about
     the pathology in Alzheimer's disease is
     not true:
 a) Neuritic Plaques are formed of amyloid protein

 b) Neurofibrillary tangles (NFT) are made of tau protein

 c) NFTs appear extracellularly before intracellular appearance

 d) Number of NFTs correlates with dementia



Correct Answer - C
Answer is C (NFTs appear extracellularly before intracellular
appearance):
NFTs are typically seen intracellularly within the soma and proximal
dendrites of neurons.
Neurofibrillary Tangles (NFTs) are intracellular accumulations of
hyperphosphorylated 'tau' proteins.
Neurofibrillary Tangles are Intracellular Accumulations
Neurofibrillary Tangles are intracellular accumulations of
hyperphosphorylated microtubule binding protein 'tau'.
Paired helical filaments of tau protein (NFTs) form intracellularly
within the soma and proximal dendrites of neurons.
These cytoskeletal protein tangles (NFTs), initially impede cellular
metabolism and axosplasmic transport leading to impaired synaptic
function and eventually to neuronal death.
These neurofibrillaty tangles may be seen as extracellular tangles
after degeneration of the neuron as evidence of the neuronal cell's
demise
Neurofibrillary Tangles are intracellular accumulations that may
appear extracellularly alter degeneration of neuron (neuronal death)
Histopathological Hallmarks of Alzheimer's Disease
                     Amyloid Plaques (Extracellular)
Amyloid Neuritic Plaques are formed by extracellular accumulation
of beta amyloid deposits within the neutropil
'Neuritic' or 'Senile' I3-amyloid plaques are an early histopathological
sign of Alzheimer's disease (that occur rarely in healthy subjects)
The amyloid 13-protein accumulated in single neuritic plaques is
toxic to surrounding structures and adjacent neurons.
Clinicopathological studies have shown that amy/aid burden does
not directly correlate with severity or duration of dementia.
                  Neurofibrillary Tangles (Intracellular)
Neurofibrillary tangles arc formed by intracellular accumulation of
hyperphosphorylated microtubule binding protein 'tau'.
NFT's occur in many neurodegenerative diseases and /or a group of
diseases called laupathies'.
These include Frontotemporal dementia, Pick's disease etc. The
cooccurance of fi-amyloid plaques with NFT's suggests a diagnosis
of AD.
The NFT's are toxic to the neurons and neurons with NFT's
eventually die and degenerate leaving a residual `ghost tangle', in
the extracellular space reminding of the pyramidal cell body in which
it was initially formed.
Clinicopathological studies have shown that dementia correlates
more strongly with NFT's than with senile plaques (3-amyloid)
485. Metastasis to thyroid comes from which
     primary site of malignancy?
 a) Liver

 b) Testis

 c) Prostate

 d) Kidney



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Kidney
Most common primary sites are kidney, breast, lung, uterus, and
melanoma.
486. Which of the following is the most
     common mutation in Ewing's sarcoma -
 a) Translocation X : 18

 b) Translocation 11; 22

 c) Activative mutation of G5a,p, surface protein


 d) Missense mutation in EXTI



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Translocation 11; 22
Ewing's sarcoma is typically charachterized by a translocation t (11;
22) (q 24; q12) in upto 90% of patients.
487. Least desmoplastic breast carcinoma is
 a) Ductal

 b) Lobular

 c) Tubular

 d) Medullary



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Lobular
"Invasive lobular carcinoma has a tendency to spread diffusely or
between the collagen fibers of the breast and produces
desmoplastic response"
488. Marker for neuroblastoma among the
     following is?
 a) NMP 22

 b) Chromogranin A

 c) LDH

 d) 32 microglobulin



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Chromogranin A
Neuroendocrine markers of neuroblastoma :- i) CD-56   ii)
Chromogranin-A iii) Synaptophysin
489. Thymic hyperplasia is seen in ?
 a) Thymoma

 b) Thymic lymphoma

 c) Myasthenia gravis

 d) Scleroderma



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Mysthenia gravis
Thymic hvperplasia
The term thymic hyperplasia usually applies to the appearance of B-
cell germinal centers within the thymus, a finding that is referred to
as thymic follicular hyperplasia.
Such B-cell follicles are present in only small numbers in the normal
thymus.
It can occur in a number of chronic inflammatory and immunologic
states, but it is most frequently encountered in myasthenia gravis
(65% to 75% of cases).
Similar thymic changes are sometimes encountered in Graves
disease, systemic lupus erythematosus, scleroderma, rheumatoid
arthritis, and other autoimmune disorders.
490. In Endometrial carcinoma, which of the
     following tumor suppressor gene
     occurs?
 a) P53

 b) Rb

 c) PTEN

 d) APC



Correct Answer - C
PTEN is a tumor suppressor gene which is implicated in the
causation of endometrial and prostate carcinoma.
491. Folding defect is associated with which
     disease
 a) Parkinson's disease

 b) Marfan syndrome

 c) Acute intermittent porphyria

 d) Wermer syndrome



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Parkinson's disease
Defective protein folding disorders (DPFDs) are a group of diverse
neurological and systemic diseases in which the hallmark
pathological event is the misfolding, aggregation and accumulation
of a protein in different organs, inducing cellular apoptosis, tissue
damage and organ dysfunction .
Includes Alzheimer's disease, transmissible spongiform
encephalopathies, serpin-deficiency disorders, sickle cell anemia,
Huntington's disease, diabetes type II, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis,
Parkinson's disease, dialysis-related amyloidosis, spinocerebellar
ataxias, secondary or reactive amyloidosis, cystic fibrosis and prion
diseases.
492. Stain used for tubulin is
 a) Luna stain

 b) Cajal stain

 c) SiR stain

 d) Masson's trichrome



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. SiR stain
fluorescent stains (SiR-Actin and SiR-Tubulin) are cell permeable
compounds which stain F-actin and microtubules, respectively.
493. X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy is
 a) Fatty acid disorder

 b) Lysosomal storage disorder

 c) Mucoplysaccharridoses

 d) Glycogen defect disorder



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Fatty acid disorder
X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy(ALD/X-ALD) is a disease is caused
by mutations in ABCD1, a gene located on the X chromosome, that
codes for ALD, a peroxisomal membrane transporter protein.
494. Chromosome for MEN2 gene is
 a) 11q13

 b) 13q11

 c) 10811.2

 d) 11q10-2



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. 10811.2
Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 MEN1 11813
Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2a RET 10811.2
495. Hob nail appearance is seen in
 a) Clear cell carcinoma

 b) Endodermal sinus tumor

 c) HCC

 d) Choriocarcinoma



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Clear cell carcinoma
Hobnail cell is a cell with a characteristic appearance, including a
bulbous nucleus and nuclear projections into the cytoplasm. Hobnail
cells are found in clear cell ovarian adenocarcinoma, collecting duct
carcinoma, and in end-stage cirrhosis
   496. Sphenoid dysplasia is seen in?
    a) NF-1

    b) Tuberous sclerosis

    c) Sturge-Weber syndrome

    d) Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease



   Correct Answer - A
   Answer- A. NF-1
   NF-1 is diagnosed if two of following sevens are present :
1. Six or more cafe-au-lait macules : > 5mm in prepubertal age and >
   15 mm in postpubertal age.
2. Axillary or inguinal freckling.
3. Two or more Lisch nodules (hamartomas on iris).
4. Two or more neurofibroma or one plexiform neurofibroma.
5. A distinctive osseous lesion : Sphenoid dysplasia or cortical thinning
   of long bones.
6. Optic glioma.
7. A first degree relative with NF-1.
497. In a case of Dysgerminoma of ovary one
     of the following tumor markers is likely
     to be raised :
a) Serum HCG

b) Serum alphafetoprotein

c) Serum lactic dehydrogenase

d) Serum inhibin



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is c i.e. Serum lactic dehydrogenase
however placental alkaline phosphate and lactate
dehydrogenase are commonly produced by dysgerminomas
and may be useful in monitoring the disease."
498. Most common site for ectopic thyroid
     tissue is?
 a) Ovaries

 b) Lingual

 c) In front of hyoid bone

 d) Stomach



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Lingual
By far the most common location is near its embryological origin at
the foramen caecum, resulting in a lingual thyroid. This accounts for
90% of all cases of ectopic thyroids.
   499. Salivary schintigraphy is useful in?
    a) Monomorphic adenoma

    b) Pleomorphic adenoma

    c) Sialidinitis

    d) Sjogren syndrome



   Correct Answer - D
   Answer- D. Sjogren syndrome
   Technitium pertechnetate scans (Salivary scintigraphy) tests the
   size, shape and function of the salivary glands. It is useful.
1. To help determine the cause of salivary gland swelling (e.g. bacteria
   or virus).
2. To detect a blockage of the salivary ducts.
3. To detect a growth in the salivary glands (e.g. Warthin's Tumour).
4. To help diagnose abnormal mouth dryness as Sjogren's Syndrome.
500. Trilateral retinoblastoma is?
 a) Bilateral Retinoblastoma plus medulloblastoma

 b) Bilateral retinoblastoma plus pineoblastoma

 c) Bilateral retinoblastoma plus neuroblastoma

 d) Bilateral retinoblastoma plus ependymoma



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Bilateral retinoblastoma plus pineoblastoma
Trilateral retinoblastoma (TRb) refers to the combination of
retinoblastoma (usually bilateral) and pineoblastoma. This
relationship highlights the close relationship between these highly
aggressive small round blue cell tumors.
501. Most common cancer to occur in organ
     transplant patient is?
a) Squamous cell carcinoma

b) Melanoma

c) Lung cancer

d) Colorectal cancer



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Squamous cell carcinoma
most common tumors after transplant
Non melanoma skin cancer (SCC >BCC) (most common)
NHL (2nd most common)
Lung carcinoma
Kaposi's sarcoma
HCC
Cervical carcinoma
502. Hydroxyl ions are destroyed in the body
     by?
 a) Vitamin C

 b) Vitamin A

 c) Vitamin K

 d) Vitamin D



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Vitamin C
"Vitamin C and other water soluble compounds, such as uric acid,
thiols including glutathione and dihydrolipoic acid and possibly other
substances such as metallothionein, serve to defend against
hydroxyl radicals. Vitamin E, in contrast, is less effective in
eliminating hydroxyl radicals.
503. Which of the following drugs is not an
     inhibitor of P - glycoprotein?
 a) Quinidine

 b) Erythromycin

 c) Verapamil

 d) Phenobarbitone



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Phenobarbitone
[Ref KDT 7Ve p.15]
P-glycoprotein:
Product of multidrug resistance 1 gene (ABCB1).
Important role in pharmacokinetics of drugs.
An ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporter and is an important
factor to limit membrane permeability in several tissues and/or
elimination pathways into urine (renal tubles) and bile (liver).
Some drugs are substrate for both CYP3A4 and P-gp. Examples
:
CCBs: Verapamil, diltiazam
Anticancer drugs: Etoposide, daunorubicin, doxorubicin, paclitaxel,
vincrisitine Antimicrobials: HIV protoease inhibitors (indinavir,
ritonavir), erythromycin, ketoconazole
Immunosuppressants: Cyclosporine, tacrolimus, sirolimus.
Other: Digoxin, fexofenadine, loperamide.
504. Liposome drug delivery system is used
     for all except ?
 a) Vincristine

 b) Amphotericin B

 c) Hyoscine

 d) Amikacin



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Hyoscine
Important drugs with liposome delivery systems:
Anticancer drugs → Donorubicin, Daunorubicin, vincristine,
camptothecin, methotrexate, cisplatin, mitoxantrane
Antifungal    → Amphotericin B, Nystatin
Antibiotics → Amikacin, Ampicillin, ciprofloxacin, Ribavirin,
Ganciclovir, chloroquine
Others      → IL-2, cyclosporin
505. Tachyphylaxis is seen with which of the
     following drugs?
 a) Pethidine

 b) Ephedrine

 c) Phenoxybenzamine

 d) Phentolamine



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Ephedrine
 [Ref KDT 7th/e p. 70 & 6th/e p. 68; Laurence 50/e p. 448; Katzung
11 `"/e p. 32]
Tachyphylaxis:
* Rapidly diminishing response to repeated administration of a drug.
Tachyphylaxis may occur due to:
* Down-regulation of receptors
  - When tissues are continuously exposed to an agonist, the number
of receptors decreases (down-regulation).
  - It occurs in asthmatics who use 132-agonist bronchodilators
excessively.
* Depletion of stored neurotransmitter
  - It is particularly common with indirectly acting sympathomimetics
drugs, e.g. amphetamine, tyramine and ephedrine.
  - It is due to depletion of releasable pool of noradrenaline from
adrenergic nerve terminals.
506. Synergestic action is shown by the
     following drug combinations except?
 a) Glibenclamide and metformin

 b) Enalapril and hydrochlorthiazide

 c) Levodopa and carbidopa

 d) Hydrochlorthiazide and triamterene



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Hydrochlorthiazide and triamterene
[Ref KDT p. 56]
SYNERGISM:
When the action of one drug is facilitated or increased by the other,
they are said to be synergistic.
In a synergistic pair, both the drugs can have action in the same
direction or given alone one may be inactive but still enhance the
action of the other when given together.
Additive drug combination:
Aspirin + paracetamol - As analgesic/ antipyretic
Nitrous oxide + halothane - As general anesthetic
Amlodipine + atenolol - As antihypertensive
Ephedrine + theophylline - As bronchodilator
507. Oxidation in biotransformation is ?
 a) Functionalization reaction

 b) Conjugation reaction

 c) Synthetic reaction

 d) Felson reaction



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Functionalization reaction
[Ref: KDT 7th/e p. 22, 23]
Biotransformation includes 2 types of reaction:
Phase I/Non synthetic/functionalization reaction: Oxidation,
reduction, hydrolysis, cyclization, decyclization.
Phase H/synthetic/conjugation reactions: Acetylation, glutathione
conjugation, glucoronide conjugation (glucuranization), glycine
conjugation, methylation, sulfate conjugation (sulfuranation),
nucleotide synthesis.
508. Oxybutynin acts by ?
 a) Adrenergic receptor antagonist

 b) Muscarinic rece8ptor antagonist

 c) Histaminic antagonist

 d) Serotonergic antagonist



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Muscarinic rece8ptor antagonist
[Ref KDT 7thle p. 113, 117]
Oxybutynin:
This recently introduced anti muscarinic (muscarinic receptor
antagonist) has high affinity for receptors urinary bladder and
salivary glands with additional smooth muscle relaxant and local
anesthetic properties.
It is relatively selective for M 1 /M3 subtypes than for M2.
509. Which of the following drug crosses
     BBB?
 a) Glycopyrrolate

 b) Neostigmine

 c) Physostigmine

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Physostigmine
[Ref KDT p. 07, 117]
Physostigmine - Rapidly absorbed from GIT and parenteral sites,
penetrates cornea freely and crosses BBB (blood brain barrier).
Neostigmine - It is a quarternary ammonium compound which is
poorly absorbed orally with poor corneal penetration and doesn't
cross BBB.
Glycopyrrolate - It is a potent and rapidly acting anti - muscarinic
lacking central effects and is used as a pre-anaesthetic medication.
510. Which of the following is not true about
     the action of anticholinergic drugs?
 a) Atropine is a CNS depressant

 b) Atropine causes mydriasis, abolition of light reflex and
    cycloplegia

 c) Atropine causes bronchoconstriction

 d) Atropine can increase the chances of hyperthermia in children



Correct Answer - A:C
Ans. A. Atropine is a CNS depressant & C. Atropine causes
bronchoconstriction
[Ref KDT 7iVe p. 113, 114]
Actions of anticholinergic drugs:
These are opposite of parasympathetic (cholinergic) system.
Atropine has an overall CNS stimulant action.
Stimulates medullary centres - vagal, respiratory, vasomotor.
Depresses vestibular excitation and has antimotion sickness
property.
Abbrevates refractory period of A-V node and facilitates A-V
conduction, PR interval is shortened.
Does not have any consistent or marked effect on BP.
Used in arrhythmias like AV block and digitalis induced arrhythmia.
Causes mydriasis due to contraction of circular muscles (constrictor
pupillae), abolition of light reflex and cycloplegia (paralysis of
accomodation).
Increases intraocular tension → Contraindicated in glaucoma.
Causes bronchodilatation and reduced airway resistance, especially
in COPD and asthma patients.
Relaxes urinary bladder, urinary retention may
occur → contraindicated in benign prostate hypertrophy.
Decreases sweat, salivary, tracheobronchial and lacrimal secretion.
Decreases secretion of acid, pepsin and mucus in the stomach.
511. Advantage of glycopyrolate over
     atropine is ?
 a) It is a natural alkaloid

 b) It lacks CNS penetration

 c) Can be used in OPC poisoning

 d) Is more potent



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. It lacks CNS penetration
[Ref KDT 7thie p. 117]
Glycopyrrolate:
Quarternary synthetic compound, which is potent and rapidly acting
anti muscarinic lacking CNS penetration and central effects.
Almost exclusively used in pre anaesthetic medication.
512. Oximes are ineffective in which of the
     following poisoning :?
 a) Organophosphate poisoning

 b) Amanita phylloides poisoning

 c) Carbamate poisoning

 d) Dhatura poisoning



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Carbamate poisoning
[Ref KDT 7th/e p. 111 & 6t /e p. 105; Katzung 11thie p. 121]
Oximes [Pralidoxime 2-PAM, obidoxime and diacetyl-monoxime
(DAM)] are used in organophosphate poisoning.
Oximes acts by reactivating cholinesterase enzyme.
Ineffective in Carbamates poisoning.
Pralidoxime is contraindicated in carbamates poisoning, because not
only it does not reactivate carbamylated enzyme, it has weak anti-
chE activity of its own.
Most commonly used cholinesterase reactivater.
513. Which of the following is an example of
     irreversible carbamate?
a) Ambenonium

b) Galantamine

c) Propoxur

d) Rivastigmine



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Propoxur
Irreversible carbamate:
Carbaryl
Propoxur
514. 38 yr old patient with high risk of
     coronary artery disease risk has
     hypertention, which of the following
     antihypertensive drugs will be suitable
     as a first line treatment for this patient?
 a) ACE inhibitors

 b) Calcium channel blockers

 c) Beta adrenergic blockers

 d) Diuretics



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. ACE inhibitors
Patient is relatively young hypertensive (38 yrs) with high risk of
coronary artery disease, ACE inhibitors/ Angiotensin receptor
blocker is the suitable first line therapy for management of
hypertention in such patients.
515. Which of the following is NOT a side
     effect of amiodarone?
 a) Pulmonary fibrosis

 b) Corneal microdeposits

 c) Photosensitivity

 d) Tachycardia



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Tachycardia
[Ref: KDT 7"Ve p. 534]
Amiodarone is a broad spectrum anti - arrhythmic drug which
belongs to class III of the anti - arrhythmic drugs.
Following are the adverse effects -
Fall in BP, bradycardia and myocardial depression occurs on i.v.
injection.
516. A side effect of loop diuretics is used in
     ?
 a) Post - surgery care

 b) Chronic anemia

 c) Blood transfusion

 d) Oncology/cancer



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Oncology/cancer
Furosemide and other loop diuretics cause hypocalcemia by
increasing Ca2+ excretion.
For the same reason they are used in tumor induced hypercalcemia
to reduce serum calcium level.
517. Why adenosine has a short half life?
 a) Spontaneous hydrolysis

 b) Uptake in subcutaneous tissue

 c) Uptake in RBC and endothelial cells

 d) Renal excretion



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Uptake in RBC and endothelial cells
[Ref KDT 6thIe p. 518; Katzung 11thie p. 244]
Adenosine is the DOC for P.S.V.T.
Administered by rapid i.v. injection either as free base or as ATP.
Action is very rapid - terminates more than 90% episodes of PSVT
within 30 sec.
Adenosine is very short acting (t. in blood - 10 sec) due to uptake
into RBCs and endothelial cells.
518. Mechanism of action of nicorandil is ?
 a) K* channel blocker

 b) I(' channel opener

 c) Na' channel blocker

 d) Cl- channel blocker



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. I(' channel opener
[Ref: KDT 7th/e p. 540, 552]
Nicorandil
This dual mechanism anti - angina drug that activates ATP sensitive
K+ channels (potassium channel opener) thereby hyperpolarizing
vascular smooth muscle.
519. Which of the following antiarrhythmic
     drugs can develop Long QT syndrome?
a) Ibutilide

b) Dofetilide

c) Sotalol

d) All the above



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. All the above
Proarrhythmic Manifestations of Most Frequently Used
Antiarrhythmic Agents:
Amiodarrone
Digoxin
Disopyramide
Dofetilide
Dronedarone
Flecainides
Propafenone
Quinidine
Sotalol
520. Which of the following is not true about
     the mechanism of action of digitalis?
 a) It binds to the intracellular face of Na' ATPase enzyme

 b) There is rise in intracellular Na'

 c) It has positive ionotropic action

 d) Digitalis action is independent of cardiac innervation



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. It binds to the intracellular face of Na' ATPase enzyme
[Ref KDT 7th/e p. 496]
Digitalis mechanism of action:
Digitalis increases the force of contraction by a direct action
independent of the innervation.
Binds to the extracellular face of the Na+ K+ ATPase and inhibits the
enzyme causing rise in the intracellular levels of Na+.
The raised Na+ in turn inhibits the Na+ Ca2+ exchanger and causes
rise in intracellular Ca+.
This raised intracellular Ca2+ is responsible for the positive
ionotropic effect.
Thus, digitalis increases the cardiac contractability and force of
contraction.
521. Which drug inhibits both
     cyclooxygenase and lipooxygenase?
 a) Aspirin

 b) Indomethacin

 c) Imidazole

 d) BW755



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. BW755
[Ref Biochemistry of eye by Elaine R. Berman p.165]
Drug - BW 755
Enzyme inhibited - Cyclooxygenase and lipoxygenase
522. Drug acting on 5HT4 receptor is ?
 a) Loxiglumide

 b) Renzapride

 c) Atractiloside

 d) Metoclopromide



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Renzapride
[Ref KDT 7th/e p. 174]
Renzapride:
Renzapride is a cisapride congener which is a prokinetic drug and it
increases the gastrointestinal motility by acting on 5HT4 receptors.
Renzapride is still more selective for 5HT4 than cisapride.
It also has lesser propensity to cause cardiac arrhythmias.
523. Drug of choice for aborting the acute
     attack of migraine is ?
 a) NSAIDs like indomethacin

 b) Opioids like morphine

 c) Triptans like sumatriptan

 d) Glucocorticoids



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Triptans like sumatriptan
[Ref KDT 7th/e P. 179]
Treatment and prophylaxis of migraine:
* For aborting an acute attack of migraine, sumatriptan (or any other
triptan) is the drug of choice.
  - Other drugs used for treatment are NSAIDs, ergo famine and
dihydroergotamine, and intranasal butorphanol.
* For Prophylaxis, Beta-blocker (propranolol) is the drug of choice.
  - Other drugs used for prophylaxis are tricyclic antidepressants
(amitriptyline), calcium channel blockers (cinnarizine, verapamil),
serotonine antagonists (methysergide, cyproheptadine), MAO
inhibitors, and anticonvulsants (valproate, topiramate, gabapentine ),
fluxetin, onabotulinum toxine A, pepaverine and phenalzine.
524. Rasburicase is an analogue of ?
 a) Xanthine oxidase

 b) IMP dehydrogenase

 c) Adenosine Deaminase

 d) Urate Oxidase



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Urate Oxidase
Rasburicase is a recombinant version of urate oxidase.
The cDNA of Urate oxidase is obtained from Aspergillus flavus and
is introduced into Sachhromyces cervicae.
It is used for reducing urate levels.
525. Adverse effect of methysergide is ?
 a) Metabolic syndrome

 b) Endocardial fibrosis

 c) Peyronie's syndrome

 d) Dry mouth



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Endocardial fibrosis
[Ref KDT 7th/e p. 174]
Methysergide
Chemically related to ergot alkaloids which antagonizes action of
5HT on smooth muscles including that of blood vessels.
Mechanism of action
Potent 5HT2A/2C antagonist with No a adrenergic or dopaminergic
action.
Uses:
Migraine prophylaxis, carcinoid syndrome and post gastrectomy
dumping syndrome.
Adverse effects
Abdominal, pulmonary or endocardial fibrosis is produced with
prolonged use.
526. Contraindication for the triptans is which
     of the following?
 a) Ischemic heart disease

 b) Epilepsy

 c) Hepatic failure

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. All of the above
[Ref KDT 7th/e p. 179]
Triptans
These are 5-HTIDAB receptor agonists.
All triptans can cause coronary vasospasm and are contraindiated in
IHD. Other contraindications are hypertension, epilepsy, hepatic or
renal impairment and during pregnancy.
The most important adverse effects are feeling of chest pressure,
tightness and pain which may be accompanied by arrhythmia and MI
and appear to be due to coronary vasospasm.
527. Advantage of formoterol over salmeterol
     is ?
 a) It can be used for prophylaxis in asthmatics

 b) It has got a faster onset of action

 c) It is a short acting beta 2 agonist

 d) It also has beta 1 agonistic action



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. It has got a faster onset of action
[Ref KDT 7Ve p. 224; Goodman Gillman 11thie p. 720]
Formoterol
It is a long acting selective 132 agonist which acts 12 hours when
inhaled. In comparison to saletetrol it has faster onset of action and
is used on a regular morning - evening schedule for round the clock
bronchodilatation.
Dose : 12 - 24 pg inhalation twice daily.
528. Use of PGF 2 a analogues is
     contraindicated in ?
 a) Post partum harmorrhage

 b) Glaucoma

 c) Bronchial asthma

 d) Priapism



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Bronchial asthma
[Ref KDT 7th/e p. 185,189] Prostaglandin F 2 a]
PGF 2a analogues are smooth muscle constrictor which bring about
contraction of smooth muscles
PGF 2a analogue like carboprost is used for post partum
haemorrhage
PGF 2a analogues like latanoprost has been used for glaucoma and
is a first line drug for open angle glaucoma.
It is contraindicated in bronchial asthma as it causes bronchial
muscle contraction.
529. Mechanism of action of Teriparatide is ?
 a) Recombinant PTH [rPTH]

 b) Recombinant calcitonin

 c) Recombinant insulin

 d) Recombinant prolactin



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Recombinant PTH [rPTH]
Teriparatide
This is recombinant preparation of 1-34 molecules of amino terminal
of human PTH.
It duplicates all the actions of long (1-84) PTH.
Diagnostic use: To differentiate pseudo from true
hypoparathyroidism: teriparatide is given i v: if plasma calcium level
fails to rise, then it is pseudohypoparathyroidism.
530. Anti-inflammatory actions of
     corticosteroids are mediated by ?
 a) By inhibiting angiogenesis

 b) By inhibiting breakdown of phospholipids

 c) By increasing vascularity

 d) By increasing granulation tissue formation



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. By inhibiting breakdown of phospholipids
[Ref KDT 7thie p.279]
Glucocorticoids interfere at several steps in the inflammatory
response but the most important overall mechanism appears to be
limitation of recruitment of inflammatory cells at the local site and
production of proinflammatory mediators like PCs, LTs, PAF through
inhibition of phospholipase A.
531. Which of the following is not an
     inhalational steroids?
 a) Beclomethasone

 b) Betamethasone

 c) Budesonide

 d) Fluticasone acetonide



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Betamethasone
[Ref KDT 7Ve p. 290]
Corticosteroid may be used as inhaled or systemic drugs in asthma.
Inhaled steroids
These are glucocorticoids with high topical and low systemic activity.
Commonly used drugs are beclomethasome, budesonide,
fluticasone and ciclesonide.
Inhaled steroids are the most effective anti-inflammatory agents
used in asthma.
532. Which of the following antithyroid
     medications had the maximum chances
     of causing agranulocytosis?
 a) Carbimazole

 b) Clotrimazole

 c) Propylthiouracil

 d) Methimazole



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Propylthiouracil
[Ref KDT 7h/e p.253]
Propylthiouracil has got maximum chance of causing
agranulocytosis. It is mostly reversible.
533. Mifepristone acts on which receptor?
 a) Type A progesterone receptor

 b) Estrogen receptor

 c) LH receptor

 d) Thyroid receptor



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Type A progesterone receptor
[Ref KDT 7hle p. 319, 320]
Mifepristone
It is a potent, 19 - norsteroid.
It has anti - progestational, significant anti - glucocorticoid and anti -
androgenic activity.
Mifepristone is a partial agonist and competitive antagonist at both A
and B forms of progesterone receptor (PR) In the absence of
progesterone (anovulatory cycles after menopause) it exerts weak
progestional activity and induces predecidual changes.
534. Pegvisomant is ?
 a) Somatostatin antagonist

 b) Somatotropin antagonist

 c) GH receptor antagonist

 d) GH receptor agonist



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. GH receptor antagonist
[Ref KDT 7th/e p. 238]
Pegvisomant
This polyethylene glycol complexed mutant GH.
It binds to GH receptor but does not trigger signal transduction and
acts as a GH receptor antagonist.
535. Drug used for medical management of
     acromegaly due to small pituitary tumors
     is?
 a) Fulvestrant

 b) Pegvisomant

 c) Vigabatrin

 d) Cabergoline



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Pegvisomant
[Ref KDT 7h/e p. 238]
Pegvisomant:
This polyethylene glycol complexed mutant GH.
It binds to GH receptor but does not trigger signal transduction and
acts as a GH receptor antagonist.
Approved for treatment of acromegaly due to small pituitary
adenomas.
536. Tibolone is a ?
 a) Natural steroidal estrogen

 b) Natural non-steroidal estrogen

 c) Synthetic steroidal estrogen

 d) Synthetic non-steroidal estrogen



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Synthetic steroidal estrogen
[Ref KDT 7Ve p. 306, 311]
Synthetic estrogens
Steroidal → Ethinylestradiol, mestranol, tibolone.
Nonsteroidal → Diethylstilbestrol, hexestrol, dienestrol.
537. Tibolone is used for ?
 a) Fibroids

 b) Endometriosis

 c) Hormone replacement therapy

 d) Anovulatory infertility



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Hormone replacement therapy
[Ref KDT 7thie p. 306, 311]
Tibolone
It is a 19-norsteroid developed specifically to be used for hormone
replacement therapy, which combines estrogenic and progestational
properties with weak androgenic activity.
In a dose of 2.5 mg daily, it suppresses menopausal symptoms and
lowere the raised Gn levels. No endometrial stimulation has been
noted.
Urogenital atrophy, psychological symptoms, libido and osteoporosis
are improved similar to other forms of HRT.
Increase in breast cancer risk appears to be less than with combined
HRT.
Weight gain, increased facial hair, and occasional vaginal spotting
may be noted.
538. Danazol acts through :?
 a) Increases release of Gn

 b) Increases insulin release

 c) Inhibition of release of Gn

 d) Inhibition of insulin release



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Inhibition of release of Gn
[Ref KDT 7th/e p. 301]
Danazole
It has weak androgenic, anabolic and progestational activity.
The most prominent action is suppression of gonadotropin (FSH/LH)
from pituitary.
539. Mechanism of action of Voglibose is :?
 a) p galactosidase inhibitor

 b) 3 lactase inhibitor

 c) a glucosidase inhibitor

 d) 3 glucosidase inhibitor



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. a glucosidase inhibitor
[Ref KDT 7th/e p. 277]
Voglibose
It is a glucosidase inhibitor which prevents breakdown of complex
carbohydrates into simpler sugars like glucose.
540. Metyrosine acts by inhibiting ?
 a) Phenolethanolamine N methyl Transferase

 b) Phenyl alanine Hydroxylase

 c) Tyrosine Hydroxylase

 d) Tyrosinase



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Tyrosine Hydroxylase
Metyrosine is a Methyl L-tyrosine
It is a competitive inhibitor of Tyrosine Hydroxylase
Tyrosine hydroxylase is the enzyme which converts Tyrosine to
Dihydroxyphenylalanine (DOPA). It is the rate limiting enzyme of
catecholamine synthesis.
541. Which of the following oral
     hypoglycaemic drugs has the longest t
     1/2 ?
 a) Gliclazide

 b) Glimepiride

 c) Chlorpropamide

 d) Tolbutamide



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Chlorpropamide
[Ref KDT 6th le p. 268]
Tolbutamide is shortest acting sulfonylurea.
Chlorpropamide is longest acting sulfonylurea and longest acting
oral hypoglycemic.
Nateglinide is shortest acting oral hypoglycemic.
Tolbutamide, because of shorter duration of action, is safer in elderly
and in those prone to hypoglycemia.
542. All of the following are uses of octreotide
     except :?
 a) Secretory diarrhea

 b) Acromegaly

 c) Hepatic encephalopathy

 d) Bleeding esophageal varices



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Hepatic encephalopathy
[Ref KDT 7tVe p. 238]
Octreotide is a synthetic octapeptide surrogate of somatostatin
which is 40 times more potent in suppressing GH and prolactin
secretion.
It is also a weak inhibitor of insulin secretion.
Uses :
Acromegaly
Secretory diarrhea associated with carcinoids, AIDS, cancer
chemotherapy or diabetes.
543. Which of the following pairs is correct?
 a) Glibenclamide - Na' ATP blocker

 b) Biguanides - AMP Kinase activation

 c) Vildagliptin - SGLT2 inhibitor

 d) Voglibose - DPP4 inhibitor



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Biguanides - AMP Kinase activation
[Ref Katzung 11th/e p. 741]
Biguanide acts as an AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK)
activator.
Activation of AMPK has a high number of potentially
antiatherosclerotic effects, including reducing inflammatory cell
adhesion to blood vessel endothelium & reducing lipid accumulation.
544. Mechanism of action of sulfonylureas is
     ?
 a) Na ATP channel blocker

 b) K ATP channel blocker

 c) CI ATP channel blocker

 d) Ca ATP channel blocker



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. K ATP channel blocker
[Ref KDT 7th/e p. 270, 274]
Sulfonylureas provoke a brisk release of insulin from pancreas.
They act on the so called "Sulfonylurea receptors" (SUR1) on
pancreatic (beta-cell membrane - cause depolarization by reducing
conductance of ATP sensitive K. channels.
This enhances influx of Ca'2-- degranulation.
They do not cause hypoglycemia in pancreatectomized animals and
type 1 diabetes (Presence of at least 30% of functional [3-cells in
essential for their action).
A minor action reducing glucagon secretion by increasing insulin and
somatostatin release has been demonstrated.
545. Nasally acting GnRH analogue is ?
 a) Goserelin

 b) Triptorelin

 c) Nafarelin

 d) Leuprolide



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Nafarelin
[Ref KDT 7thie p. 242]
GnRH analogues are used by SC route, however nafarilin and
busurelin can be used as intranasal spray.
GnRH analogues can cause hot flushes, loss of libido and
osteoporosis.
546. Which of the following is/ are side
     effect/s of growth hormone
     administration?
 a) Pain at injection site

 b) Glucose intolerance

 c) Hypothyroidism

 d) All the above



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. All the above
[Ref KDT &hie p. 234] Adverse effects of growth hormone
Somatropin and somatrem are recombinant GH analogues.
Somatrem has an additional methionine residue and is more
immunogenic than somatropin, but allergic reactions or resistance to
treatment are not a problem.
Pain at injection site and lipodystrophy can occur.
Glucose intolerance, hypothyroidism (due to unmasking of TSH
deficiency), salt and water retention, hand stiffiress, myalgias,
headache are the possible adverse effects
Rise in intracranial tension occurs in few cases.
547. Which of the following drugs halts
     macrovascular as well as microvascular
     effects of DM?
 a) Acarbose

 b) Biguanides

 c) Meglitinide

 d) Algaliptin



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Biguanides
[Ref KDT Th/e p. 276] Biguanides]
* Biguanides like metformin are the 1st line drugs for the treatment
of Type 2 DM, which acts by AMPK activation.
* Advantages of Biguanides are as follows,
  - Non hypoglycemic.
  - Promotes weight loss.
  - Prevents macro as well as microvascular complications of DM.
548. Which of the following are naturally
     occurring opioid?
 a) Di acetyl morphine

 b) Ethyl morphine

 c) Morphine

 d) Pholcodeine



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Morphine
[Ref KDT 7"/e p. 474]
Classification of opioids :
Naturally occurring opium alkaloids :- Morphine, codeine
Semi synthetic opiates : - Diacetyl morphine (heroin), pholcodeine
and ethylmorphine.
Synthetic opioids :- Pethidine (Meperidine), fentanyl, methadone,
dextropropoxyphene, tramadol.
549. Most potent opioid is ?
a) Butorphanol

b) Pentazocine

c) Sulfentanyl

d) Hdrocodone



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Sulfentanyl
[Ref KDT p. 476]
The order of potency of opioids:
Sufentanil > Fentanyl > Buprenorphine > Hydromorphone,
Oxymorphone > Butorphanol > Levorphenol > Oxycodone >
Hydrocodone > Nalbuphine, morphine, Methadone > Pentazocine >
codeine > Mepridine (Pethidine) > Propoxyphane.
550. All of the following pairs are correct
     except ?
 a) Peripheral decarboxylase inhibitor - Benserazide

 b) MAO - B inhibitor - Clorgyline

 c) COMT inhibitor - Entacapone

 d) Dopamine facilitation - Amantadine



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. MAO - B inhibitor - Clorgyline
[Ref: KDT Thle p. 439 & &le p. 439; Katzung 11th/e p. 513]
Note: Clorgyline is a MAO A inhibitor not MAO B.
551. Which of the following is used for the
     patient on anti​parkinsonian medication
     levodopa + carbidopa, but patient
     showing marked on - off effect?
 a) Bromocriptine

 b) Amatidine

 c) Selegeline

 d) Rimonabant



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Selegeline
[Ref: Harrison 18th/e p. 3326, 3327]
If there is wearing off (on -off effect) COMT inhibitor or MAO-B
inhibitor (selegiline) is added
552. Which of the following is not true about
     benzodiazepines?
 a) Can produce ataxia

 b) Has GABA facilitatory but no GABA mimetic action

 c) REM, and Stage 3 and 4 sleep is increased

 d) Produces muscle relaxation by action on medulla



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. REM, and Stage 3 and 4 sleep is increased
Ref: KDT 6th/e p. 394 & 5th/e p. 317, 363]
Mechanism of action of benzodiazepines (BZDs):
Muscle relaxation is produced by action on medulla.
Ataxia is due to action on cerebellum.
BZDs acts on GABAA receptors.
Effect on CNS:
In contrast to barbiturates, BZDs are not general depressant, but
exert relatively selective anxiolytic, hypnotic, muscle relaxant and
anticonvulsant effects.
The antianxiety action of BZDs is not dependent on their sedative
property - with chronic administration relief of anxiety is maintained,
but drowsiness wanes off due to development of tolerance.
Stage 2 sleep is increased, while REM, Stage 3 & 4 sleep are
decreased.
553. Which of the following is not true about
     barbiturate?
 a) Shows GABA mimetic action

 b) Shows GABA facilitatory action

 c) It can depress voltage gated Na.- and IC' channels at high
    concentrations

 d) Limbic system is most sensitive to the depressive action of
    barbiturates to CNS



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Limbic system is most sensitive to the depressive
action of barbiturates to CNS
[Ref KDT 7th/e p. 399 & 6th/e p. 391]
Action on CNS:
Barbiturates act primarily at the GABA - BZD receptor - Cl channel
complex and potentiate GABAergic inhibition by increasing the
lifetime of Cl- channel opening caused by GABA (Contrast
benzodiazepines which enhance frequency of CI channel opening) -
GABA facilitatory action.
Barbiturates depress all areas of CNS, but the reticular activating
system is most sensitive.
554. Which of the following can be used in the
     management of tardive dyskinesia ?
 a) Cessation of antipsychotic medication

 b) Baclofen

 c) Tetrabenazine

 d) All the above



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. All the above
[Ref KDT 7th/e p. 445, Harrisons 18th/e p. 3333]
Tardive Dyskinesia:
Commonest of the tardive syndromes and is typically composed of
chore form movements involving the mouth, lips, and tongue.
Atypical antipsychotics (e.g., clozapine, risperidone, olanzapine,
quetiapine, ziprasidone, and aripiprazole) are associated with a
significantly lower risk of TD in comparison to traditional
antipsychotics.
Treatment primarily consists of stopping the offending agent.
If the patient is receiving a traditional antipsychotic and withdrawal is
not possible, replacement with an atypical antipsychotic should be
tried.
In refractory cases, catecholamine depleters such as tetrabenazine
may be helpful. Tetrabenazine can be associated with dose
dependent sedation and orthostatic hypotension.
Other approaches include baclofen (40-80 mg/d), clonazepam (1-8
mg/d), or valproic acid (750-3000 mg/d).
555. Temazepam is superior to diazepam in ?
 a) Longer duration of action

 b) Safely used in liver failure

 c) No active metabolite required.

 d) High hepatic metabolism



Correct Answer - B:C
Ans. B. Safely used in liver failure & C. No active metabolite
required.
[Ref KDT 7'/e p. 405]
Temazepam
Intermediate acting benzodiazepine.
Its metabolism is independent of liver and hence, can be safely
given in patients with hepatic failure.
Temazepam does not have an active metabolite like diazepam
[Note: Diazepam is converted to an active metabolite `desmethyl
diazepam' (oxazepam)].
556. Drug contraindicated in absence
     seizures is
 a) Lamotrigine

 b) Clonazepam

 c) Tiagabine

 d) Ethosuximide



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Tiagabine
Carbamazepine, vigabatrin, and tiagabine are contraindicated in the
treatment of absence seizures, irrespective of cause and severity.
557. Mechanism of action of tianeptin is :?
 a) Increase 5HT uptake

 b) Decrease 5HT uptake

 c) Increase DA uptake

 d) Decrease DA uptake



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Increase 5HT uptake
[Ref KDT 7th/e p. 447]
Tianeptin
Atypical anti - depressant
Increases 5HT uptake and is neither sedative nor stimulant.
Shown efficacy in anxio-depressive states, particularly with
psychosomatic symptoms, as well as endogenous depression.
Side effects include: dry mouth, epigastric pain, flatulence,
drowsiness/insomnia, tremor and the bodyache.
558. Venalafaxine is an FDA approved drug
     for the treatment of ?
 a) Major depression

 b) Generalised anxiety disorder

 c) Panic disorder

 d) All the above



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. All the above
[Ref Medical basis of psychiatary by S Hossein, p. 79]
Venlafaxine
It is serotonin and noradrenaline reuptake inhibitors (SNRI), but in
contrast to older TCAs it does not interact with cholinergic,
adrenergic, histaminergic receptors and does not have sedative
property.
It is faster acting (other faster acting antidepressants are bupropion
and mirtazapine).
It raises the BP (all other antidepressants cause hypotension).
It is FDA approved for use in major depression, generalized anxiety
disorder, and panic disorder.
559. FDA approved drug for refractory
     schizophrenia ?
 a) Amoxapine

 b) Haloperidol

 c) Clozapine

 d) Penfluridol



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Clozapine
[Ref KDT rie p. 441]
Clozapine is FDA approved drug for resistant schizophrenia
It reduces the risk of sucidal behavior in younger patients with
schizophrenia.
560. True about anti - Parkinson drug
     levodopa is :?
 a) Levodopa is an active metabolite of dopamine.

 b) About 50% of administered levodopa is peripherally converted
    to carbidopa.

 c) About 2% of the administered levodopa crosses blood brain
    barrier.

 d) Levodopa has no role in hepatic coma.



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. About 2% of the administered levodopa crosses blood
brain barrier.
[Ref KDT 7th/e p. 426]
Levodopa:
Levodopa is inactive by itself, but is the immediate precursor of the
neurotransmitter dopamine.
95% of the oral dose is decarboxylated in the peripheral tissues.
About 1 - 2% of the administered levodopa crosses the blood brain
barrier to reach the brain, which is taken up by the surviving
dopaminergic neurons and converted to dopamine.
The stimulation of excitatory DI as well as the inhibitory D2 receptors
in striatum achieves the same net effect of smoothening movements
and reducing muscle tone.
It produces a non-specific 'awakening' effect in the hepatic coma.
561. Which of the following is true about
     ziprasidone?
 a) Profound extrapyramidal symptoms

 b) Causes weight loss

 c) Has anti - depressant properties

 d) Safe in cardiac patients.



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Has anti - depressant properties
[Ref KDT 7th/e p. 442]
Ziprasidone:
Atypical anti - psychotic
It has a 5 H1 + 5HT2 + D2 blocking activity with antagonism at
5HT1D and agonist at 5HT1A.
Being atypical it is free from extrapyramidal side effects (EPS) and
has got good anxiolytic and anti depressant properties.
It causes mild weight gain and hyperglycemia and causes QTc
prolongation and serious cardiac arrhythmias.
562. Which of the following nephrotoxic
     drugs should be completely avoided in
     renal failure?
 a) Doxycycline

 b) Talampicillin

 c) Nitrofurantoin

 d) Nalidixic acid



Correct Answer - B:C:D
Ans. B,Talampicillin C.Nitrofurantoin & D.Nalidixic acid
Drugs to be avoided in renal patients:
Cephalothin
Talampicillin
Nalidixic acid
Tetracyclines (except doxycyline)
Nitrofurantoin
563. The typical maintence dose of
     Leveteracetam is?
 a) 10 - 20 mg/ Kg/day

 b) 20 - 30 mg/ Kg/day

 c) 30 - 40 mg/ Kg/day

 d) 40 - 50 mg/ Kg/day



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. 30 - 40 mg/ Kg/day
[Ref KDT 7hle p. 420]
Levetiracetam
Unique anti - convulsant which has shown efficacy in refractory
partial seizures with or without generalization.
Dosage:
The recommended starting dose is 10 mg/ Kg/ day given twice daily.
The dosage can be increased weekly or biweekly by 10mg/ Kg/ day.
The typical maintenance dose is 30 - 40 mg/ Kg/ day.
564. Botulinum toxin is used in treatment of ?
 a) Axillary hyperhidrosis

 b) Blepharospasm

 c) Cervical dystonia

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. All of the above
[Ref KDT 7th/e p. 99]
Botulinum toxin A and B are highly potent exotoxins produced by
Clostridium botulinum which causes `botulinum' by inhibiting Ach
release.
It is used in treatment of blepharospasm, spastic cerebral palsy,
strabismus, spasmodic torticollis, nystagmus, hemifacial spasm,
axillary hyperhidrosis, spastic cerebral palsy which is due to
cholinergic excess.
It has also been used for facial wrinkles.
565. Which of the following antipsychotics
     show partial D2 agonist activity?
 a) Aripiprazole

 b) Clozapine

 c) Quetiapine

 d) Ziprasidone



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Aripiprazole
[Ref Goodman 6 Gillman 1 p. 464, 465, 466; Katzung 11"'/e p. 495]
Aripiprazole:
Only antipsychotic with D2 agonistic activity. (all others are D2
antagonists).
Longest acting
It also has 5HT1A agonistic and 5HT2 antagonistic activity - Also
known as dopamine-serotinine stabilizer.
It is least sedating antipsychotic can cause insomnia.
566. Which drug is given in the pain due to
     diabetic neuropathy?
 a) Lamotrigine

 b) Na valproate

 c) Gabapentin

 d) Morphine



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Gabapentin
[Ref KDT 7th/e p. 409]
Gabapentin
This is lipophilic GABA derivatve.
Gabapentin enhances GABA release but itself does not act as a
agonist at the GABAA receptor.
It crosses to the brain and enhances GABA release but does not act
as agonist at GABAA receptor.
Gabapentin is considered to be a first line drug for pain due to
diabetic neuropathy and postherpetic neuralgia.
Uses
GTCS and partial seizures
Pain due to diabetic neuropathy
Postherpetic neuralgia
Prophalaxis of migraine
567. Topical antifungal of choice for
     aspergillus infection of eye is ?
 a) Miconazole

 b) Clotrimazole

 c) Econazole

 d) Fluconazole



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Clotrimazole
[Ref Khurana Ophthalmology 4th/e p. 422]
Clotrimazole:
Fungistatic and is effective against Candida, Aspergillus and many
others.
Its 1 percent suspension is effective topically and is the treatment of
choice in Aspergillus infections of the eye.
568. Which of the following is a topical
     antifungal agent?
 a) Benzyl benzoate

 b) Brimetenide

 c) Butenafine

 d) Posconazole



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Butenafine
[Ref KDT 7thie p. 796]
Butenafine:
Butenafine is a benzylamine congener of the terbinafine, which acts
by inhibiting the enzyme squalene epoxidase.
Used only topically for treatment of dermatophytosis.
Efficacy in tinea cruris/corporis/pedis is similar to that of terbenafine.
569. Fastest acting anti malarial drug is ?
 a) Chloroquine

 b) Quinine

 c) Mefloquine

 d) Artether



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Artether
[Ref Harrisons 18th/e p. 26-2]
Artemisinin derivatives:
Artesunate, artemether, arteether, and the parent compound
artemisinin are sesquiterpene lactones derived from the wormwood
plant Artemisia annua.
These are the fastest acting erythrocytic schizontocide.
570. Which of the following increases
     Amphoterecin B induced nephrotoxicity?
 a) Vancomycin

 b) Cyclosporin

 c) Acyclovir

 d) All the above



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. All the above
[Ref Katzung 11th/e p. 836]
"Aminoglycosides. vancomycin, cyclosporine er other nephrotoxic
drugs enhance renal impairment caused by AMB"
Risk factors for amphotericin B induced nephrotoxicity
Following risk factors increase the chances of nephrotoxicity
caused by amphotericin:
Concomitant use of diuretics.
Abnormal baseline renal function (kidney diseases)
Dehydration (volume depletion):- It is a key factor for the renal
tolerance of all the potential nephrotoxic drugs. Therefore, all
patients should receive 1-2 liters of isotonic saline prior to
amphotericin B infusion.
Concomitant use of nephrotoxic drugs:- Aminoglycosides,
vancomycin, cyclosporine, tacrolimus (FK-506), acyclovir, NSAIDS,
radio-contrast agents
Higher average daily dose of amphotericin B.
571. Erythromycin is used in the treatment of
     which GIT disorder?
 a) Bacillary dysentery

 b) Amoebic dysentery

 c) Diabetic gastroparesis

 d) Ulcerative colitis



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Diabetic gastroparesis
[Ref KDT 7h/e p. 753]
Erythromycin:
Macrolide antibiotic.
Erythromycin stimulates motilin (an upper gastrointestinal peptide
hormone) receptors in the GIT which induces gastric contractions,
hastens gastric emptying and promotes intestinal motility without
significant effect on colonic motility.
It has been occasionally used to afford short term symptomatic relief
in diabetic gastroparesis, however, undesirable alteration of gut flora
limits its use.
572. Which macrolide is active against
     Mycobaterium leprae?
 a) Azithromycin

 b) Roxithromycin

 c) Clarithromycin

 d) Framycetin



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Clarithromycin
[Ref KDT 7th/e p. 754, 780, Harrisons 18thie p.1364-65]
Clarithromycin is a newer macrolide, which is effective against MAC
(Mycobacterium avium complex), atypical mycobacteria and
Mycobacterium leprae.
573. Ivermectin is the drug of choice for
     which of the following infections?
 a) Trichuriasis

 b) Onchocerciasis

 c) Loiasis

 d) Trichinosis



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Onchocerciasis
[Ref KDT 7h/e p. 853]
Ivermectin:
Extremely potent semisynthetic derivative of nematodal principal
obtained from Streptomyces avermitilis.
DOC for single dose treatment of onchocerciasis and
strongyloidosis.
Only oral drug effective against scabies and pediculosis.
Acts by glutamate gated CI- channel which causes tonic paralysis in
nematodes.
574. Which of the following causes retinal
     pigmentation?
 a) Quinine

 b) Chloroquine

 c) Mefloquine

 d) Atovaquone



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Chloroquine
[Ref KDT 7thie p. 823]
Chloroquine:
1st line anti malarial drug, which is an erythrocytic schizonticide.
However, its prolonged use of high doses (as in DLE, rheumatoid
arthritis) may cause loss of vision due to retinal damage in the form
of retinal pigmentation.
Cause corneal deposits and affect vision and are reversible on
discontinuation.
Loss of hearing, rashes, photoallergy, myopathy, graying of hair may
occur.
575. Mechanism of action of Linezolid is :?
 a) Inhibits 30S ribosome subunit of 50S ribosome

 b) Inhibits 23S ribosome subunit of 50S ribosome

 c) Inhibits 5S ribosome subunit of 50S ribosome

 d) Inhibits 5PS. ribosome subunit of 50S ribosome



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Inhibits 23S ribosome subunit of 50S ribosome
[Ref KDT 7111e p. 758]
Linezolid:
An `oxazole dianones' useful in treatment of MRSA and some VRSA
strains
It acts by inhibiting bacterial protein synthesis by binding to 23S
fraction of 50S ribosome.
Binding of the linezolid distorts the tRNA binding site overlapping
both 50S and 30S ribosomal subunits and stops the protein
synthesis.
It is a predominantly bacteriostatic drug.
576. Which of the following is not true about
     levamisole?
 a) It is the levoisomer of tetramisole

 b) It has immunomodulator action

 c) It can kill strongyloides larvae and adult worms

 d) It is used against ascariasis and ancyclostomiasis



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. It can kill strongyloides larvae and adult worms
[Ref KDT 7ffile p. 852]
Levamisole, Tetramisole:
Tetramisole was developed in the late 1960s.
It is recemic; its levo isomer (levamisole) was found to be more
active and is preferred now.
Both are active against many nematodes, but use is restricted to
ascariasis and ancylostomiasis, because action on other worms is
poor.
Strongyloides larvae are killed, but adult worms are not sensitive.
The ganglia in worms are stimulated causing tonic paralysis and
expulsion of live worms.
Interference with carbohydrate metabolism (inhibition of fumarate
reductase) may also be contributing.
Levamisole is an immunomodulator as well. Levamisole restores
depressed T cell function.
It was once used as a disease modifying drug in rheumatoid arthritis
and as an adjunct in malignancies, aphthous ulcers, recurrent
herpes but repeated doses produce reactions and now it has been
withdrawn.
577. Which of the following is a side effect of
     clofazimine?
 a) Reddish black skin discoloration

 b) Hemolytic anaemia

 c) Flu like syndrome

 d) Axillary freckling



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Reddish black skin discoloration
[Ref KDT 7th le p. 781, 782]
Clofazamine:
1st line anti - leprotic drug
Dye with leprostatic and anti - inflammatory properties.
Gets accumulated in macrophages and gets deposited in many
tissues. Including subcutaneous fat as needle shaped crystals
responsible for reddish black skin discoloration.
Discoloration of skin, hair and body secretions may occur.
Conjunctival pigmentation may also occur.
578. Mechanism of action of Niclosamide is :?
 a) Inhibition of substrate level phosphorylation

 b) Inhibition of oxidative phosphorylation

 c) Inhibition of proton efflux pumps

 d) Increase production of free radicals



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Inhibition of oxidative phosphorylation
[Ref KDT 7th/e p. 854]
Niclosamide acts by inhibiting oxidative phosphorylation in
mitochondria and by interfering with anaerobic generation of ATP.
It is mainly active against cestodes - T. solium, T. saginata,
Diphyllobothrium latum and H. nana.
579. For systemic mycosis fluconazole is
     preferred over ketoconazole because of -
 a) Greater efficacy

 b) Longer t 1/2

 c) Lesser side effects

 d) All the above



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. All the above
[Ref KDT &le p. 761]
Imidazoles and Triazoles:
These are presently the most extensively used antifungal drugs.
Four imidazoles are entirely topical, while ketoconazole is used both
orally and topically.
Two triazolesfluconazole and itraconazole have largely replaced
ketoconazole for systemic mycosis because of greater efficacy,
Longer t 1/2, fewer side effects and drug interactions.
The imidazoles and triazoles have broad spectrum antifungal activity
covering dermatophytes, Candida, other fungi involved in deep
mycosis (except mucor), Nocardia, some gram positive and
anaerobic bacteria, e.g. Staph. aureus, Strep. faecalis, Bac. fragilis
and Leishmania.
The mechanism of action of imidazoles and triazoles is the same.
They inhibit the fungal cytochrome P450 enzyme lanosterol 14-
demethylase' and thus impair ergosterol synthesis leading to a
cascade of membrane abnormalities in the fungus.
The lower host toxicity of triazoles compared to imidazoles has
correlated with their lower affinity for mammalian CYP450 enzymes
and lesser propensity to inhibit mammalian sterol synthesis.
However, because they are active against certain bacteria as well
(which do not have ergosterol), other mechanisms of action also
appear to be involved.
580. INH hepatotoxicity is due to which
     compound?
 a) INH acetylhydrazine

 b) INH sulfhydrazine

 c) INH methylhydrazine

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. INH acetylhydrazine
[Ref KDT 7th le p. 767]
INH is extensively metabolized in liver, most important pathway
being N - acetylation by NATZ.
The rate of INH acetylation shows genetic variation with some being
Fast acetylators - 30 to 40% patients.
Slow acetylators - 60 to 70% patients.
Isoniazid induced peripheral neuritis is more common in slow
acetylators.
Hepatotoxic minor metabolite is produced by CYP2E1 from
acetylhydrazine.
581. What is the effect of co administration of
     rifampicin and ritonavir in patients
     suffering from AIDS?
 a) Area Under Curve decreased by 15%

 b) Area Under Curve decreased by 35%

 c) Area Under Curve increased by 15%

 d) Area Under Curve increased by 35%



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Area Under Curve decreased by 35%
[Ref Kucers: the use of antibiotics 6th edn by M Lindsay Grayson
p.1598]
Co administration of ritonavir with rifampicin:
Recommendation is to use the combination with caution.
Area under curve decreased by 35%
There is no change in rifampicin concentration
It is recommended to monitor the antiretroviral activity of ritonavir
582. Drug of choice for surgical prophylaxis
     is :?
 a) Cefaclor

 b) Ceftizoxime

 c) Cefazolin

 d) Cefoperazone



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Cefazolin
[Ref KDT 7th/e p. 726]
Cefazolin is the prototype 1st generation cephalosporin that is active
against PnG sensitive organisms ie streptowcce, gonococci and
group.
It is the preferred parenteral first generation cephalosporin for
surgical peophylaxis.
583. Vapiprost is a ?
 a) Thromboxane receptor antagonist

 b) Thromboxane synthetase antagonist

 c) PGE 1 analogue

 d) PGI 2 analogue



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Thromboxane receptor antagonist
[Ref Internet ncbi article]
Vapiprost:
Novel congener, which is a recently developed thromboxane
receptor antagonist.
It prevents platelet aggregation, prevents thrombus formation and
thereby preventing vessel occlusion.
It is usually used alongwith rt PA like alteplase, renecteplase,
tenecteplase.
584. Treatment of clopidogrel toxicity can be
     done with ?
 a) Whole human blood

 b) Platelet transfusion

 c) vWf transfusion

 d) rFVIIa infusion



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. rFVIIa infusion
rFVIIa (Recombinant factor Vila) has been shown to restore
thrombin generation in clopidogrel treated blood samples, and
shorten thrombin generation lag time in patients who had been
treated with aspirin and clopidogrel, and in blood samples treated
with clopidogrel's active metabolite.
Thus they can be used for the management of clopidogrel toxicity
induced bleeding i.e. can be used to reverse the effects of
clopidogrel.
585. Why is clopidogrel preferred over
     ticlopidine?
 a) Lower incidence of neutropenia and thrombocytopenia

 b) Lower incidence of dyslipidemia

 c) Lower incidence of hyperglycemia

 d) Lower incidence of postural hypotention



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Lower incidence of neutropenia and thrombocytopenia
[Ref KDT 6thie p. 610]
Clopidogrel:
This newer congener of ticlopidine has similar mechanism of action,
ability to inhibit platelet function and therapeutic efficacy, but
appears to be safer and better tolerated (CLASSICS study).
Clopidogrel is safer than ticlopidine as it is less associated with
hematological dyscrasias than use of ticlopidine.
A lower frequency of neutropenia, thrombocytopenia and other bone
marrow toxicity compared to ticlopidine has been recorded.
The clopidogrel as aspirin in patients at risk of ischaemic events
(CAPRIE) trial has found clopidogrel recipients to have a slightly
lower annual risk of primary ischaemic events than aspirin
recipients.
586. Which of the following antilipidemic drug
     is a sterol absorption inhibitor?
 a) Gemfibrozil

 b) Simvastatin

 c) Nicotinic acid

 d) Ezetimibe



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Ezetimibe
[Ref KDT 7th/e p. 635] 3
Classification of antihyperlipidemic drugs
HMG CoA reductase inhibitor:
Statins: Lovastatin, Simvstatin, Pravastatin, Atorvastatin,
Rosuvastatin
Bile acid sequestrants
Resins: Colestipol, Cholestyramine
LPL activator/PPAR alpha activator - Clofibrate, gemfibrozil,
fenofibrate.
Sterol absorption inhibitor - Ezetimibe
Lipolysis & TG synthesis inhibitor - Nicotinic acid
587. Mechanism of action of Torcetraprib is ?
 a) Bile acid sequestrant

 b) Sterol absorption inhibitor

 c) Lipoprotein lipase activator

 d) CETP inhibitors



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. CETP inhibitors
[Ref: KDT 7h le p. 641]
CETP Inhibitors:
CETP, i.e., Cholesteryl ester transfer proteins inhibitors are class of
cholesterol lowering agents.
CETP facilitates exchange of CHE with T4 between HDL and
chylomicrons, VLDL and LDL which plays an important role in the
disposal of HDL associated CH.
Examples of CETP inhibitors: Torcetrapib & Anacetrapib
Clinical trials have been performed and torcetrapib was found to
increase occurrence of cardiovascular events like angina, MI, heart
failure and death.
588. Most potent H2 antagonist is :?
 a) Ranitidine

 b) Cimetidine

 c) Famotidine

 d) Nizatidine



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Famotidine
[Ref KDT 7h /e p. 650 & 6th le p. 629; Katzung 1 lth le p. 1070]
H2-receptor antagonists
Drugs in this group are cimetidine, ranitidine, famotidine, roxatidine,
nizatidine and loxatidine.
Famotidine is the most potent H2 blocker. Famotidine has some
inverse agonistic action on H2 receptors.
All H2-blockers are competitive blockers except famotidine
(competitive - noncompetitive) and loxatidine (non competitive).
H2 blockers are usually given for 6-8 weeks.
589. Not an adverse effect of cimetidine ?
 a) Confusional state, restlessness

 b) Gynecomastia

 c) Dry mouth

 d) Decreased prolactin levels



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Decreased prolactin levels
[Ref: KDT 7h/e p. 650]
Cimetidine:
H2 blocker which has been replaced by new congeners due to its
many adverse effects. Following are its adverse effects :
Well tolerated by most patients: adverse effects occur in < 5%.
These are generally mild.
Headache, dizziness, bowel upset, dry mouth, rashes.
CNS effects like confusional state, restlessness, convulsions and
coma have occurred infrequently in elderly patients, in those with
renal impairment, especially with large doses infused
590. Use of metoclopramide beyond weeks
     increases the chances of tardive
     dyskinesia ?
 a) 8

 b) 12

 c) 16

 d) 20



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. 12
[Ref Pharmacology and physiology for anesthesia by Hugh E.
Hemmings p. 511]
FDA has issued a black box warning for metoclopramide, given the
high isk of developing tardive dyskinesia if metoclopramide use
extends beyond 12 weeks.
591. The two molecules of Aminosalicylate
     coupled via azo bond form?
 a) Mesalazine

 b) Olsalazine

 c) Balsalazine

 d) Sulfasalazine



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Olsalazine
[Ref KDT 7h/e p. 684]
Olsalazine – 2 molecules of aminosalicylate (ASA) coupled by azo
bonds.
Balsalzine 5ASA linked to 4 – aminobenzoyl - (3 alanine.
Sulfasalazine 5ASA linked to sulfapyridine by azo bond.
Mesalazine : - pH coated tablet of 5ASA
592. Natural anticancer drug is ?
a) Paclitaxel

b) Methotrexate

c) Cyclophosphomide

d) All of the above



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Paclitaxel
[Ref Goodman & Gilman 11th/e p. 1350-1354; Katzung 1   p. 949]
Antimitotic drugs of natural (plant) sources.
Vincristine
Vindesine
Paclitaxel
Vinblastine
Vinorelbine
Dacetaxel
Other natural anticancer drugs are
Epipodophyllotoxins (Etoposide)
Bleomycin
Anthracyclins (Doxorubicin, daunorubicin)
Camptothecins
Mitomycin 'C'
Actinomycin 'D'
593. Drug acting on 'S' phase of cycle ?
 a) Chlorambucil

 b) Methotrexate

 c) Vincristine

 d) Paclitaxel



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Methotrexate [ Ref KDT 7"le p. 823]
Cell cycle specific
They kill actively cycling cell and their site of action is confined to
one phase of the cell cycle.
Drugs causing cell cycle specific inhibition are given below :
G, phase :     Vinblastine
S phase :      Mtx, cytarabine, 6-TG, 6-MP, Hydroxyurea, mitomycin
G2 phase : Bleomycin, etoposide, Daunorubicin, Topotecan
M phase :       Vincristine, vinblastine, paclitaxel, dacetaxel,
Ixabepilone, Estramustine.
594. Mechanism of action of aprepitant is ?
 a) RANK ligand inhibitor

 b) MMDA antagonist

 c) NK 1 receptor antagonist

 d) 5 HT3 antagonist



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. NK 1 receptor antagonist
[Ref Goodman & Gillman's 11`" /e p.1005]
Aprepitant
Aprepitant is an antiemetic substance that belongs to a class of
drugs called substance P antagonists.
The compound mediates its effect by blocking the neurokinin 1
(NK1) receptor.
Aprepitant crosses the blood brain barrier.
Aprepitant is used for chemotherapy induced nausea & vomiting
(CINV), and post- operative nausea & vomiting (PONY).
After absorption aprepitant is bound extensively to plasma proteins
(>95%); it is metabolized avidly, primarily by hepatic CYP 3A4 and is
excreted in the stools.
595. Use of HAART is associated with
     hepatotoxicity approximately what
     percentage of patients?
 a) 10%

 b) 20%

 c) 30%

 d) 40%



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. 10%
[Ref Harrisons 18th/e p. 2566]
Highly Active Antiretroviral Therapy (HAART):
Combination antiretroviral therapy (cART), also referred to as highly
active antiretroviral therapy (HAART), is the cornerstone of
management of patients with HIV infection.
Indirect hyperbilirubinemia, resulting from direct inhibition of
bilirubinconjugating activity by UDP-glucuronosyltransferase, usually
without elevation of aminotransferase or alkaline phosphatase
activities, occurs in -10% of patients treated with the protease
inhibitor indinavir.
596. Bendamustine is useful for the
     management of ?
 a) Chronic lymphoid leukemia

 b) Colon carcinoma

 c) Breast carcinoma

 d) Renal carcinoma



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Chronic lymphoid leukemia
[Ref Hematology Basic principles and practice by Ronald Hoffman,
p. 819]
Bendamustine
It is a chemotherapy medication used in the treatment of chronic
lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), multiple myeloma, and non-Hodgkin's
lymphoma.
It works by interfering with the function of DNA and RNA
597. Abraxane is a :?
 a) Albumin bound docetaxel

 b) Globulin bound docetaxel

 c) Albumin bound paclitaxel

 d) Globulin bound paclitaxel



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Albumin bound paclitaxel
[Ref Katzung 11thle p. 1235]
Abraxane is a novel albumin bound paclitaxel which has got lesser
propensity to cause hypersensitivity reactions than paclitaxel.
Abraxane is use in the treatment of the advanced metastatic breast
carcinoma patients.
Paclitaxel acts by inhibiting microtubulin polymerization and inhibits
division of metastatic cells.
598. Abatacept binds to on T cell surface
 a) CD I I

 b) CD 20

 c) CD 22

 d) CD 28



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. CD 28
[Ref Katzung 11th/e p. 634]
Abatacept
It is a fusion protein that combines the extracellular domain of the
molecule CTLA4 (CD 154) with the Fc portion of a human
immunoglobulin.
It interfere with the interactions between antigen presenting cells and
T lymphocytes.
Therefore, it affects early stages in the pathogenic cascade of event
in RA.
CTLA4 has high affinity for CD 28, when abatacept binds to CD28
on T cell surface, it prevents the second signal from being delivered,
thus turning down the T cell response.
599. Cardiotmdcity is the side effect of :?
 a) Bleomycin

 b) Topotecan

 c) Rubidomycin

 d) Procarbazine



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Rubidomycin
[Ref KDT 7th/e p. 826]
Anthracycline induced cardiotoxicity
Rubidomycin and doxorubicin are the anthracycline anti - tumor
antibiotics
They have cardiotoxicity as a adverse effect.
This can manifest either acutely with ECG changes, arrhythmias and
hypotension, which are reversible, or be delayed like CHF.
600. Tocilizumab acts as an antagonist at
     which reeptor -
 a) IL I

 b) IL 2

 c) IL 6

 d) TNF



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. IL 6
[Ref Harrisons 18thiedn p. 2750]
Tocilizumab is a humanized monoclonal antibody directed against
the membrane and soluble forms of the IL-6 receptor.
IL-6 is a proinflammatory cytokine implicated in the pathogenesis of
RA, with detrimental effects on both joint inflammation and damage.
IL-6 binding to its receptor activates intracellular signaling pathways
that affect the acute phase response, cytokine production, and
osteoclast activation.
601. Mechanism of action of Basiliximab is ?
 a) TNF a inhibitor

 b) IL 1 antagonist

 c) IL 2 antagonist

 d) IL 6 antagonist



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. IL 2 antagonist
[Ref KDT 7`/e p. 878, 884]
Basiliximab and Daclizumab
They are highly humanized chimeric monoclonal anti CD 25
antibody which binds to and acts as IL 2 receptor antagonist.
Combined with other immunosuppressants like azathioprine and
MMF to prevent renal and other transplant rejection reactions.
Plasma t1/2 of Daclizumab is around 3 weeks which is much longer
than Basiliximab.
602. Estramustine is a combination of ?
 a) Estradiol + normustine

 b) Estriol + normustine

 c) Estriol + mechloroethamine

 d) Estriol + cyclophosphamide



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Estradiol + normustine
[Ref KDT 7thie p. 858, 866]
Estramustine
Complex of estradiol and nitrogen mustard normustine which has
weak estrogenic but no alkalyting property.
It binds to p tubulin and interferes with its organization of
microtubules exerting anti - mitotic action.
603. Pemetrexed is indicated for use in which
     of the following?
 a) Mesoepithelioma

 b) Non small cell lung carcinoma

 c) Ewings sarcoma

 d) Osteosarcoma



Correct Answer - A:B
Ans. A.Mesoepithelioma & B.Non small cell lung carcinoma
[Ref: KDT 7th/e p. 858, 863]
Pemetrexed is a newer congener of methotrexate which primarily
targets the enzyme thymidylate synthase.
Uses: In combination with cisplatin, pemetrexed is approved for
treatment of mesoepithelioma and non small cell lung carcinoma.
604. Which of the following is not true about
     purine antagonists?
 a) Azathioprine is used as immunosuppresant

 b) Drugs are activated by hypoxanthine guanine phosphoribosyl
    transferase [HGPRTase]

 c) Fludoribine is the drug of choice for CLL

 d) Cladarabine is degraded by adenosine deaminase



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Cladarabine is degraded by adenosine deaminase
[Ref Katzung Ilth/e p. 948]
Purine antagonists
6-mercaptopurine (6-MP), 6-thioguanine, fludarabine and
cladarabine are purine analogues that are used in cancer
chemotherapy.
Cladarabine is the DOC for Hairy cell leukemia as it is resistant to
degradation by adenosine derminase.
605. Panitumumab is used for which cancer?
 a) Colon cancer

 b) Lung cancer

 c) Breast cancer

 d) Osteoclastoma



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Colon cancer
[Ref Harrisons 18thie p. 677]
Panitumumab
It is a monoclonal antibody against EGF receptor. It is used for
management of (Colorectal) colon cancer.
606. Cetuximab is used to treat ?
 a) Adamantinoma

 b) Basal cell Ca

 c) Colorectal Ca

 d) Crohn's disease



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Colorectal Ca
[Ref KDT 7th/e p. 870, Harrisons 18thie p. 677]
Cetuximab
Cetuximab is EGF (Epithelial growth factor) receptor antibody, which
prevents cell growth, proliferation and metastasis.
It is approved for Head neck and face squamous cell Ca as adjuvant
with cisplatin.
It is also used for EGF receptor +ve colorectal Ca.
607. Which of the following is not an adverse
     effect of cyclophosphamide?
 a) Hemorrhagic cystitis

 b) Infertility

 c) Bone marrow suppression

 d) Diabetes insipidus



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Diabetes insipidus
[Ref Harrison 17e/e p. 521; Goodman & Gilman 11th/e p. 1326;
Katzung 11tVe p. 941]
Toxicity of Cyclophosphamide
Bone marrow suppression (relative platelet sparing)
Pulmonary toxicity
Cardiac (at higher doses)
Cystitis
Infertility
GI Toxicity
Alopecia
Teratogenesis
   608. Adverse effect of the imatinib are all
        except ?
    a) Periorbital edema

    b) Myalgia

    c) Pleural effusion

    d) Arthralgia



   Correct Answer - D
   Ans. D. Arthralgia
   [Ref KDT 7th/e p. 870]
   Imatinib is a tyrosine kinase inhibitor, which inhibits PDGF (Platelet
   derived growth factor) receptor as well.
   Uses:
1. CML - Chronic myeloid leukemia
2. DOC for c-kit +ve GIST (Gastrointestinal Stromal Tumor)
   Adverse effects :
   Abdominal pain, vomiting, fluid retention, pleural effusion, periorbital
   edema, myalgia, liver damage and CHF.
609. Defect in discriminating blue green
     vision is due to which drug :?
 a) Alprostadil

 b) Primaquine

 c) Sildenafil

 d) Primaquine



Correct Answer - C
Ans.C. Sildenafil
[Ref KDT 7thle p. 303 - 304]
Sildenafil (Viagra) acts to increase cGMP by inhibiting its breakdown
by phosphodiesterase isoform 5 (PDE-5).
Recommended that at least 6 hours pass between use of a nitrate
and the ingestion of sildenafil.
Sildenafil also has effects on color vision, causing difficulty in blue-
green discrimination.
Two similar PDE-5 inhibitors, tadalafil and vardenafil, are available.
610. Racecadotril is used for?
 a) Chronic diarrhea

 b) Acute secretory diarrhea

 c) Chronic constipation

 d) Diabetic gastroparesis



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Acute secretory diarrhea
[Ref: KDT 7th/e p.686]
Racecadotril is rapidly converted to thiorphan, an enkephalinase
inhibitor which prevents the degradation of encephalin (ENK) which
are mainly 8 opioid receptor agonists.
It decreases intestinal hypersecretion without affecting motility and
used for short term treatment of acute secretory diarrhea.
611. True about trientene is :
 a) It is the drug of first choice in wilsons disease

 b) It is more potent curiuretic agent than penicillamine

 c) Trientine therapy can cause iron deficiency

 d) Trientine cannot be given orally



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Trientine therapy can cause iron deficiency
[Ref Harrisons 18thie p. 3189]
Penicillamine Vs trientine in wilson disease
Penicillamine is the drug of choice for treatment of wilson's disease.
However, the drug produces undesirable side effects and in some
patients become intolerable.
Trientine is indicated especially in patients who are intolerant to
penicillamine.
Trientine is less potent cupriuretic agent than penicillamine.
Trientine is orally effective and short acting.
Trientine may cause iron deficiency; this can be overcome with short
course of iron therapy but iron and trientine should not be ingested
within 2 hours of each other.
612. Which of the following drugs is
     associated with priapism?
a) Hydralazine

b) Prazocin

c) Resperidone

d) All the above



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. All the above
Drugs that may cause priapism:
Anticoagulants
Haloperidol
hydralazine
Nifedipine
Olanzapine
Papaverine
Phenothiazines
Phentolamine
Prazosin
Risperidone
Trazodone
613. Which of the following is a Cl- channel
     activator?
 a) Lubriprostone

 b) Nefazodone

 c) Varenioline

 d) Valethamate



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Lubriprostone
[Ref Harrisons 18th/e p. 2500]
Chloride Channel Activators
Lubiprostone is a bicyclic fatty acid that stimulates chloride channels
in the apical membrane of intestinal epithelial cells.
Chloride secretion induces passive movement of sodium and water
into the bowel lumen and improves bowel function.
Lubiprostone is a new class of compounds for treatment of chronic
constipation with or without IBS.
614. Which drug is used in the treatment of
     Type I tyrosinemia?
 a) Nitisinone

 b) Alogliptin

 c) Pemoline

 d) Milrinone



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Nitisinone
[Ref Nelson 20'Ve p. 641]
A diet low in phenylalanine and tyrosine can slow but does not halt
the progression of the condition.
The treatment of choice is nitisinone, which inhibits tyrosine
degradation at 4-HPPD. This treatment prevents acute hepatic and
neurologic crises.
Although nitisinone stops or greatly slows disease progression,
some pretreatment liver damage is not reversible.
615. Modafinil is a drug used in which of the
     following conditions?
 a) Premature ejaculation

 b) Premenstrual syndrome

 c) Shift work disorder

 d) Erectile dysfunction



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Shift work disorder
[Ref KDT 7th/e p. 487]
Modafinil
It is a newer psychostimulant popular with night shift (call centre)
workers and people who want to improve alertness and keep awake.
It is claimed to increase attention span, and improve accuracy
compromised by fatigue and sleepiness.
The approved indications are narcolepsy, sleep apnea syndrome
and shift work disorder.
616. Acamprostate is used for ?
 a) Alcohol abstinence

 b) Nicotine abstinence

 c) Opioid abstinence

 d) Cocaine abstinence



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Alcohol abstinence
[Ref KDT 7th/e p. 393]
Acamprosate is a weak NMDA receptor antagonist with modest
GABAA receptor agonistic activity used for maintenance of alcohol
abstinence.
It has also been found to reduce relapse of drinking behavior.
It is started immediately after alcohol withdrawal and given at a dose
of 666 mg 2 - 3 times a day.
Loose motion is the most common side effect.
617. If a woman is assaulted by her husband
     then he is charged under:
     FMGE 11
a) Sec. 498-A IPC

b) Sec. 304-A IPC

c) Sec. 304-B IPC

d) Sec. 504 IPC



Correct Answer - A
Ans. Sec. 498-A IPC
618.
Punishment for criminal abortion for the
women who gives consent and the performer
are covered under IPC section ?
 a) 312

 b) 313

 c) 314

 d) 315



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., 312
Punishment for performing criminal abortion with the consent of
women; both for the women and performer is included in IPC
Section 312.
619.
Adultery is described under which section of
IPC?
 a) 314

 b) 375

 c) 497

 d) 504



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is c' i.e., 497 [Ref Women and the Law p. 167]
Section 497 of IPC says, "Whoever has sexual intercourse with a
person who is and whom he knows or has reason to believe to be
the wife of another man, without the consent or connivance of that
man, such sexual intercourse not amounting the offence of rape, is
guilty of the offence of adultery and shall be punished.
620.
Use of dangerous weapon is related to which
section of IPC?
 a) 304

 b) 319

 c) 322

 d) 324



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'D' i.e., 324
319 IPC : Defines hurt.
320 IPC : Defines grievous hurt.
321 IPC : Voluntarily causing hurt.
322 IPC : Voluntarily causing grievous hurt.
323 IPC : Punishment for voluntarily causing hurt (no provocation,
no dangerous weapon) (1 years imprisonment).
324 IPC : Punishment for voluntarily causing hurt by dangerous
weapon (3 years imprisonment ± fine).
325 IPC : Punishment for voluntarily causing grievous hurt (no
provocation, no dangerous weapon) (7 years imprisonment ± fine).
621.
   Grievous hurt comes under which section of
  IPC?
    a) Section 319

    b) Section 320

    c) Section 324

    d) Section 326



   Correct Answer - B
   Section 320
   REF: Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology by Nagesh
   Kumar Rao Page 259
   Section 320: Grievous hurt
   The following kinds of hurt only are designated as "grievous"
1. Emasculation
2. Permanent privation of the sight of either eye
3. Permanent privation of the hearing of either ear
4. Privation of any member or joint
5. Destruction or permanent impairing of the powers of any member or
   joint
6. Permanent disfiguration of the head or face
7. Fracture or dislocation of a bone or tooth
8. Any hurt which endangers life or which causes the sufferer to be
   during the space of twenty days in severe bodily pain, or unable to
   follow his ordinary pursuits.
622.
Outraging modesty of women is which
section of IPC?
 a) 375

 b) 354

 c) 195

 d) 304



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., 354 [Ref Reddy 26th/e p. 365]
Rape and other sexual offences and assault
228 IPC : Prohibits disclosure of identity of rape victim.
375 IPC : Defining rape.
376 IPC : Punishment for rape (7 years to life imprisonment ± fine).
376-A IPC : Punishment for marital rape (2 years imprisonment ±
fine).
377 IPC: Unnatural sexual offences (10 years to life imprisonment ±
fine).
354 IPC : Assault or criminal force to woman with intent to
outrage her modesty.
366-A IPC : Procuration of minor girl for illicit intercourse.
351 IPC : Defines assault.
352-358 IPC : Punishment for causing assault.
509 IPC : Word, gesture or act intended to insult the modesty of a
women
623.
Section 89 IPC is for?
 a) Criminal responsibility of insane

 b) Criminal responsibility of a child

 c) Criminal responsibility of drunken person

 d) Age for consent



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is' i.e., Criminal responsibility of a child
89 IPC: A child under 12 years of age can not be given valid consent
to suffer any harm which can occur from an act done in good faith
for the benefit of the child, e.g., consent for surgery. The only
guardian can give such consent.
An act is done in good faith for the benefit of a child or insane
person, by or by consent of the guardian.
Nothing which is done in good faith for the benefit of a person under
twelve years of age, or of unsound mind, by or by consent, either
express or implied, of the guardian or other person having lawful
charge of that person, is an offence because of any harm which it
may cause, or be intended by the doer to cause or be known by the
doer to be likely to cause to that person
624. A person is declared dead if he/she is
     not found for
 a) 7 years

 b) 10 years

 c) 14 years

 d) 21 years



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e.,7 years [Ref Civil Law, Section 108 MA]
The Indian Evidence Act, under section 108 provides 7 years from
the date whence a person is declared to be missing and his
625.
Adulteration of drug is under which section
of IPC
 a) 271

 b) 272

 c) 273

 d) 274



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., 274 [Ref Safety Management of Hospitals p. 315;
Principles of FMT, Bardale p. 18]
Law related to Adulteration :- Indian Penal Code :?
Section 272 → Adulteration of Food or Drink Intended for Sale
Imprisonment for 6 months, Fine - Rs. 1000 Section 273 → Sale of
Noxious Food or Drink
Imprisonemnt for 6 months, fine - Rs. 1000 Section
274 → Adulteration of Drugs
Section 275 → Sale of aduletrated drugs
Section 276 → Sale of drugs as a different drug or preparation
Section 277 → Fouling water of public spring or reservoir
626. Minimum age for giving consent for
     organ donation in India is?
 a) 16 years

 b) 18 years

 c) 21 years

 d) No age limit



Correct Answer - B
A legal age of 18 years has been set to consent for termination of pregnancy (MTP Act
1971), donation of blood and donation of organs (Transplantation of Human Organ Act
1994).

As per Transplantation of Human Organs Act 1994 "donor" means any person, not less
than eighteen years of age, who voluntarily authorizes the removal of any of his organs for
therapeutic purposes under subsection (1) or sub-section (2) of section 3.
Parents or Guardians consent will be required for any individual below 18 years wishing to
donate an organ.
627. First carpal bone to appear is?
 a) Trapezium

 b) Capitate

 c) Pisiform

 d) Lunate



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'B' i.e., Capitate [Ref Reddy's Essentials 26th/e p. 63]
The ossification centres in carpal bones appear as follows :
n Capitate                   1 year n Hamate 2 years
n Triquitrum                 3 years n Lunate    4 years
n Scaphoid and trapezoid 5 years n Trapezium6 years
n Pisiform                   11 years
628. Four carpal bones are present at what
     age:
     DNB 09
 a) 3 years

 b) 4 years

 c) 5 years

 d) 6 years



Correct Answer - B
Ans. 4 years
629. Ossification centre of scaphoid appears
     at
a) 1-6 months

b) 1 to 2 years

c) 2 to 4 years

d) 4 to 6 years



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. 4 to 6 years
630. Holograph will is defined as
 a) Doctor dictates and written by relatives

 b) Testator is written in his own handwriting

 c) Testator is dictated and written by relatives

 d) Testator is dictated and written by doctor



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e.,Testator is written in his own handwriting [Ref SK
Singhal 4th/e p. 314]
Holograph will is one which is written by the testator in his own
handwritting.
Testamentary capacity is defined as the capacity of a person to
make a valid will.
631. Subpubic angle is :
 a) <65°

 b) 65-75°

 c) 85°

 d) 110-120°



Correct Answer - C
85°
632. Obtuse angle of mandible is seen in
 a) Infancy

 b) Adulthood

 c) Adult Male

 d) Adult Female



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Infancy [Ref Parikh 6th le p. 2.30]
Feature       Infancy Adult Old age
Angle of      Obtuse Right
                                Obtuse angle
mandible angle angle
Mental        Near     Midway Looks apparently nearer the of body
foramen       lower    b/w      & lower border upper border d/t loss of
opening       border upper teeth
633. Size of the fetus is 20 mm, then by the
     rule of Hasse’s, what is the gestational
     age of the fetus?
 a) 2 weeks

 b) 4 weeks

 c) 6 weeks

 d) 8 weeks



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e.,6 weeks
Hess's rule (Haase's rule): It is a rough method for calculating the
age of fetus by measuring the length from crown to heel. Up to
5th month of gestation, length of the foetus in cm is square of the
month of gestation and beyond 5 months, length in cm is 5 times the
month of gestation.
Length in cm = (month of pregnancy) → upto 5 months
Length in cm = month of pregnancy → after 5 months
In this question :
Length in cm = (month of pregnancy)2
2 = (month of pregnancy) → (Note : 20mm = 2cm)
Month of pregnancy = 14 months or 6 weeks.
634. First incisor to erupt is
 a) Lower central

 b) Upper central

 c) Lower lateral

 d) Upper lateral



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e.,Lower central [Ref Reddy 30thie p. 60]
First temporary tooth to upper (in primary dentition) is lower central
incisors and last temporary tooth to erupt is2nd molar. The
sequence of eruption is lower central incisor > upper central incisor
> upper lateral incisor >lower lateral incisor > I" molar > Canine >
molar. Therefore eurption of temporary teeth is completed by
eruption of 2"° molar at 25 months (2 years).
First permanent tooth to erupt (in secondary dentition) is 1" molar
and last to erupt is 3rd molar. The sequence of eruption is 1" molar >
central incisor > lateral incisor > 1" premolar > 2" premolar > canine
> 2" molar > 3rd molar. Eruption of permanent teeth is completed by
eruption of 3rd molar between 17-25 years.
635. A baby has stated to get his first milk teeth. His age is approximately:
 a) 3 months

 b) 6 months

 c) 9 months

 d) 12 months



Correct Answer - B
Most babies have their first primary (milk) teeth erupt at age 6 month of age and first
secondary teeth erupt at age 6 years.

The teeth in the upper jaw erupt earlier than those in the lower jaw, except for lower central
incisors. The lower central incisors appear, commonly, between the ages of 5 and 8
months. The upper central incisors appear a month later and the lateral incisors usually
within the next three months. The first molar teeth appear around the age of 12-15 months,
preceding the eruption of canine teeth by 6 months, which appear between the age of 18
and 21 months. The second molars are out at the age of 21 to 24 months.

Note: Permanent teeth eruption is in the following order: 1st molar - 6 years; central and
lateral incisors - 6-8 years; canines and premolars - 9-12 years; second molars - 12 years;
third molars - 18 years or later.

Ref: Ghai Essential Pediatrics by O P Ghai, 6th edition, Page 6 ; Nelson Textbook of
Paediatrics 17th edition page 18 & 37
636. X-ray of choice for age detection at
     around 16-17 years of age
 a) Elbow

 b) Wrist

 c) Shoulder

 d) Pelvis



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Wrist [Ref Parikh 6th/e p. 2.10]
Site           Age (in years)
               Female Male
Elbow          13-14 15-16
Wrist          16-17 18-19
Shoulder       17-18 19-20
Crest of ilium18-19 20-21
637. Rigor mortis occurs due to:
     September 2008
 a) Muscle of the body began to relax

 b) Capillo-venous distension in the most dependent body parts

 c) Muscle of the body began to stiffen

 d) Mummification of the body tissues



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C: Muscle of the body began to stiffen
A few hours after the death, the joints of the body stiffen and
become locked in place. This stiffening is called rigor mortis.
Depending on temperature and other conditions, rigor mortis lasts
approximately 24- 48 hours in winter and 18-36 hours in summer.
The phenomenon is caused by the skeletal muscles partially
contracting. The muscles are unable to relax, so the joints become
fixed in place Rigor mortis can be used to help estimate time of
death.
The onset of rigor mortis may range from 1-2 hours, depending on
factors including temperature (rapid cooling of a body can inhibit
rigor mortis, but it occurs upon thawing). Maximum stiffness is
reached around 12-24 hours post mortem. It first starts in involuntary
muscles (myocardium)
Eyelids, neck and jaw muscles are affected first, with the rigor then
spreading to other parts of the body.
The joints are stiff but after some time general tissue decay and
leaking of lysosomal intracellular digestive enzymes will cause the
muscles to relax.
638. Post mortem lividity is not seen in ?
 a) Drowning in well

 b) Drowning in a fast flowing river

 c) Postmortem submersion

 d) Drowning in chlorinated swimming pool



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Drowning in a fast flowing river [Ref Parikh 6th/e
p.3.10]
639. Post mortem staining gets fixed after :
 a) 2-3 hrs.

 b) 3-4 hrs.

 c) 5-6 hrs..

 d) 7-8 hours



Correct Answer - D
D i.e. 7-8 hours
640. Suggilation is due to which of the
     following?
 a) Gravity leading to pooling of blood

 b) Escape of blood from microvasculature

 c) Molecular death leading to stiffening of muscles

 d) Autolysis of enzymes



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Gravity leading to pooling of blood [Ref Reddy
30th/e p. 141]
Gravity leading to pooling of blood → Suggilation
Molecular death leading to stiffening of muscles → Rigor Mortis
Autolysis of enzymes → Putrefaction
641. Earliest sign of fetal death -
 a) Spalding sign

 b) Robert's sign

 c) Ball sign

 d) Adipocere formation



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Robert's sign [Ref Parikh 6th le p. 5.75, 5.76 &
4th/e p. 268]
Robert sign (gas in great vessels) → 12h
Spalding sign (overlapping of skull bones) → 1 week
Blair-Hartley/Ball sign (hyperflexion/hyperextension → 3-4 weeks of
spine with overcrowding of ribs
642. First sign of maceration is
 a) Robert's sign

 b) Skin slippage

 c) Spalding sign

 d) Greenish discoloration of body



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Skin slippage [Ref Parikh 6"Ve p. 5.75; SK Parikh
4th/e p. 268]
Maceration is a process of aseptic autolysis.
It occurs when a dead fetus remains in the uterus for 3-4 days
surrounded by liquor amnii but with exclusion of air.
Skin slippage is the earliest sign (occurs within 12 hours).
643. Which is the best temperature for
     putrefaction?
 a) - 10 degrees C

 b) 0 degrees C

 c) 30 degrees C

 d) 50 degrees C



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., 30 degrees C [Ref Reddy 30th/e p. 150]
Putrefaction is the last stage in resolution of body from the inorganic
to organic state and is a certain sign of death.
The putrefaction is due to :
Autolysis :
The enzymes of the body, break down the dead body causing
proteolysis, lipolysis and glycolysis.
Bacterial enzymes :
Aerobic and anaerobic bacteria present in small intestine (e.g. C.
welchii, staphylococcus, E.coli etc.) release enzymes (especilly
lipase and lecithinase), which act on body to cause breakdown.
Three conditions are necessory for putrefaction : (i) warmth (10-45°),
(ii) moisture (humidity) and (iii) air. If air is absent, adipocere
formation (saponification) occurs, and in the absence of moisture,
mummification occurs.
644. According to Casper's dictum,
     decomposition is the fastest when the
     body is in which of the following?
 a) Air

 b) Water

 c) Earth

 d) Soil



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Air [Ref Reddy 30thie p. 155]
It is the effect of medium (in which body lies) on rate of putrefaction.
Casper's dictum states that a body decomposes in air twice as
rapidly as in water and eight times as rapidly in earth.
645. Enzyme responsible for postmortem
     hemolysis is
 a) Hemolysin

 b) Lecithinase

 c) Lipoproteinase

 d) Protease



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Lecithinase [Ref Textbook of FMT by Vij 5th/e p.
89]
Bacteria produce a large variety of enzymes that act on
carbohydrates, proteins and fats and break down the various
tissues.
One of the most important enzymes is the lecithinase' produced by
the Clostridium welchii, which hydrolyses the lecithin
present in all the cell membranes including blood cells and thus is
responsible for producing hemolysis of blood postmortem.
This enzyme also helps in postmortem hydrolysis and hydrogenation
of body fat.
646. Mummification is enhanced by ?
 a) Moist and hot air

 b) Moist and cool air

 c) Dry and hot air

 d) Dry and cool air



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Dry and hot air
Mummification
It is a modification of putrefaction, which occurs in the absence of
moisture. That is when there is excess air and warmth but no
moisture (humidity), i.e. hot dry and windy climate, mummification
takes place in place of normal putrefaction. Thus mummification
occurs in deserts, especially in summer and also in bodies buried in
shallow grave in sandy soil.
Mummification is characterized by dessication or drying of the dead
body. There is drying, dehydration and shriveling of dead body. It
proceeds from exterior to interior. Therefore first to be involved is
skin, especially of exposed body parts like lips, nose tip, hands
(fingers) and feet (toes). The skin is shrunken, contracted, dry,
brittle, leathery, streched across bony prominences and rusty brown
to black in color. Internal viscera also dry up, darken in color and
blend with each other to form a single mass. Body emits smell like
rotten cheese. Facial features and injuries are well preserved, thus
identification of body and cause of death can be determined (like
adipocere formation).
Time required for mummification varies between 3 months - 2 years.
If properly preserved, a mummified body can remain for years.
Chronic arsenic or antimony poisoning favor mummification.
Medicolegal importance : (i) Identification of body (facial features are
preserved), (ii) cause of death (injury marks are preserved), (iii) time
since death can be estimated.
647. Postmortem wound best differs from the
     antemortem wound by :
 a) Gaps on incising

 b) No clots

 c) Absence of erythema and cellular changes

 d) All



Correct Answer - C
C i.e. Absence of erythema & cellular change
648. Pugilistic attitude is characteristically
     seen in ?
 a) Burns

 b) Drowning

 c) Electrocution

 d) Hanging



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Burns
649. Treatment of choice for stab injury
     caecum ?
a) Caecostomy

b) Ileo-transverse anastomosis

c) Transverse colostomy

d) Sigmoid colostomy



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., ileo-transverse anastomosis
Stab and low-velocity injuries to the colon with minimal
contamination and hemodynamical stability can be managed by
primary repair mechanisms like ileotransverse anastomosis.
650. Gun powder on body and clothing can be
     visualized by?
 a) Harrison and Gilroy test

 b) Neutron activation analysis

 c) Dermal nitrate test

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., All of the above [Ref Parikh ele p. 4.39]
Tests used in firearm discharge :
Based on detection of nitrate : Dermal nitrite (Paraffin) test.
Based on detection of heavy metal : Harrison and Gilroy test,
neutron activation analysis, Atomic obsorption spectroscopy, and
flameless atomic absorption spectroscopy.
651. Bullet fixed from a gun is not released. It
     is ejected out with subsequent shot.
     Such a bullet is called as
 a) Tandem bullet

 b) Dum - dum bullet

 c) Inceridiary bullet

 d) Tumbling bullet



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Tandem bullet [Ref SK Singhal 4thle p. 188]
Varieties of bullets are :-
i) Incendiary (igniting) bullet :
The tip of bullet contains self igniting material e.g. barium nitrate and
powdered aluminium and magnesium (in the past, phosphorus was
used), so that it catches fire on hitting the target. It is used to cause
fire in usually inflammable targets like fuel tanks (of air crafts etc).
ii) Explosive bullet :
The tip contains a detonator or lead azide, so that the bullet
explodes on hitting the target.
iii) Dum-dum bullet (expanding bullet):
It is a jacketed bullet with is nose tip chiseled or cut off It is designed
to increase in diameter and expand upon striking the target, thus
producing larger diameter wounds of limited penetration.
iv) Tandem bullet (Piggey tail bullet) :
It is called one-behind-other bullet because two bullets are ejected
one after the other, when first bullet failed to leave the burrel and is
ejected by subsequently fired bullet.
Therefore, both enter body through same enterance wound (some
times, they may enter through different entries), but the wounds of
exit are always two.
652. Which of the following causes maximum
     damage?
 a) Tandem

 b) Dumdum

 c) Souvenir

 d) Piggy



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Dumdum [Ref SK Singhal e/e p. 188]
Expanding bullets, also known as hollow-point bullets or "dum-
dums", are designed to "mushroom" upon entering a target in order
to stop it from leaving the body. Compared to regular bullets, or full
metal jack ammunition, expanding bullets are intended to cause
maximum tissue damage.
653. A bullet packed with jacket and opens at
     a base is called
 a) Dum dum bullet

 b) Tandem bullet

 c) Duplex bullet

 d) Souvenir bullet



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Dum dum bullet [Ref Parikhp. 4.33]
654. Ricochet bullet is
 a) Bullet producing a key hole entry wound

 b) Bullet with nose tip chiseled off

 c) Deviation in the direction or path of bullet

 d) Bullet containing igniting material



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Deviation in the direction or path of bullet [Ref
Reddy 30th/e p. 211]
Ricochetting of bullet is defined as deviation in the direction or path
of bullet because of striking of bullet to an intermediary object.
655. Compound used as primer in weapon is
 a) Potassium chlorate

 b) Sulphur

 c) Potassium nitrate

 d) Nitrocellulose



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Potassium chlorate [Ref Parikh 6th/e p.
4.29] Cartridge (round)
Cartridge is the ammunition used in firearms. Cartridge consists of
(i) Cartridge case, (ii) Propellant (gun powder), (iii) Projectile
(missile) and (iv) Wads (only in shot guns.).
1) Cartridge case
It is the outer shell or covering of the cartridge. In shotgun it is
cylinderical. Base is of brass and rest of it is of cardboard or plastic.
In rifled weapons, it is tapering and whole of it is made of brass or
steel.
Center of base has percussion cap (detonator cap) which has
sensitive composition, i.e. primer, consisting of potassium chlorate,
antimony sulphide, mercury fulminate, barium nitrite, lead peroxide
or tetrazene.
In all weapons, after firing, the cartridge case remains in the barrel
and it is to be taken out manually (shotgun, revolvers, rifle) or it is
ejected out automatically, e.g. in pistals.
2) Propellent (gun powder)
It propels the projectile (missile) forward. It is composed of black
powder or smokeless powder in the form of grains, pellets, thin
cylindrical cords or flakes. Its ignition results in formation of
expanding hot gases under pressure which (gas pressure) propels
the projectile (missile) by providing it necessary muzzle velocity and
striking energy.
The classical gun powder is known as black powder, consists of
charcol (15%), Sulphur (10%), and potassium nitrate (75%).
Depending on fineness, the black gun powder is designated as FG,
FFG, FFFG. etc. (F = fineness). Pyrodex is another gun powder with
same components, but with different ratios.
Black gun powder produces smoke, i.e. It is smoke producing
powder. Smokeless powder, in addition to black powder, has
nitrocellulose (single base), or nitrocellulose plus nitroglycerine
(double base), or nitrocellulose plus nitroglycerine plus
nitroguanidine (triple base). Semi smokeless powder has 80% black
powder and 20% smokeless
656. Destructive power of bullet is determined
     by all except
 a) Velocity of bullet

 b) Weight of bullet

 c) Shape of bullet

 d) Kinetic energy



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e.,Shape of bullet [Ref Reddy 29th le p. 194]
Tissue damage (or destructive power of bullet) is dependent on
striking (kinetic) energy of bullet, which is proportional to its mass
and square of velocity (KE = '/2 mv2). So modern bullets are
designed to have smaller mass allowing transportation of large
amount of ammunition and high velocity, as velocity is more
important determinant in destructive power of bullet.
657. Heat Rupture is characterized by:
 a) Regular margins

 b) Irregular margins

 c) Ruptured blood vessels

 d) Ruptured Red Blood cells/clotted blood



Correct Answer - B
B i.e. Irregular margins
658. Sexual stimulation obtained through
     some inanimate object is known as:
     September 2003
 a) Transvestism

 b) Fetichism

 c) Voyeurism

 d) Zoophilia



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B i.e. Fetichism
659. Transvestism is :
 a) Wearing clothes of opposite sex

 b) Touching ones own private parts to others

 c) Desire for sexual intercourse with dead bodies

 d) Orgasm from visualisation part of the body of a woman



Correct Answer - A
A i.e. Wearing clothes of opposite sex
660. Which of the following is meant by the
     term ‘Sin of Gomorrah’?
 a) Oral sex

 b) Anal sex

 c) Bestiality

 d) Lesbianism



Correct Answer - A
Oral sex is also called coitus per os or Sin of Gomorrah or buccal
coitus.
According to Bible the sin was common in a town called: Gomorrah,
so the name.
It is included in Unnatural sexual offences Act (S.377 IPC).
Ref: The Essentials of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology by Dr. K.
S. Narayan Reddy, 27th edition, Page 365.
661. Voyeurism is ?
 a) Sexual gratification by watching the act of sexual intercourse

 b) Use of such objects for sexual gratification

 c) Sexual gratification is by self pain

 d) Sexual gratification by rubbing private part



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Sexual gratification by watching the act of sexual
intercourse [Ref Reddy 30th/e p. 395]
Voyeurism ( Scoptophilia, Peeping tom) : Sexual gratification is
obtained by looking at the sexual organs of other persons, watching
the act of sexual intercourse, or witnessing undressing by a woman.
662. Which of the following is the test done to
     confirm live born fetus after fetal death?
 a) Mirror test

 b) Breslau's test

 c) Magnus test

 d) Paraffin test



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Breslau's test [Ref SK Singhal 4th le p. 271]
Tests used in infanticide
Ploucquet's test :
Weight of lung is measured in relation to body wieght. Before birth
weight of lung is 1/70 of body weight and after respiration it becomes
1/35 of body weight due to increased blood flow in lung beds.
Static test or Fodere's test :
The average weight of both lungs before respiration is 30-40 gm and
after respiration is 60-70 cm.
Hydrostatic test (Raygat's test, 1" life test) :
The gravity of a non-respired lung is 1040-1050 and of a respired
lung is 940-950, so, after respiration lung floats on water (specific
gravity of water is 1000).
Breslau's second life test :
It assumes that a live born child would respire and therefore, would
also swallow some air into the stomach and bowel.
Hence they float on water. This test is falsely positive in putrefaction
(due to putrefied gases) or in cases of attempted artificial respiration.
Werdin's test :
Before birth middle ear contains gelatinous embryonic tissue which
is replaced by air after respiration.
663. Bansdola is a form of strangulation
     by:
     NEET 14
 a) Ligature

 b) Hands

 c) Wooden sticks

 d) Bend of elbow



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Wooden sticks
Depending upon the method used to constrict the neck,
strangulation can be divided into :
Ligature strangulation :
* Neck is compressed by a ligature of which usually multiple rounds
are given and no knot is tied.
Throttling (manual strangulation) :
* Neck is compressed by one or both hands.
* When neck is compressed by two palms, it is known as palmar
strangulation.
Bansdola :
* Compression of neck with one or two wooden sticks or bamboo.
Garrotting :
* It is compression of neck by a rope thrown from behind. Spanish
windlass is a type of garrotting, which used to be the
official mode of execution in spain. In this, an iron color around the
neck was tightened by a screw for strangulation.
Mugging (choke hold) :
* It is compression of neck by forearm or in the bend of elbow.
Strangulation by knee/foot :
* In this, neck is compressed by knee or foot.
664. Following is most suggestive of
     antemortem hanging:
     DNB 09
 a) Salivary dribbling

 b) Congestion of lungs

 c) Ligature marks

 d) Petechial hemorrhages



Correct Answer - A
Ans. Salivary dribbling
665. A couple was locked up in a room with
     fire around. All of the following are the
     probable immediate causes of death in
     such circumstance except:-
 a) Cyanide intoxication

 b) Suffocation

 c) Sepsis

 d) Fat embolism



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Sepsis [Ref Reddy 29'/e p. 287; Parikh 6th le p.
4.153]
Causes of death in burns
Causes of death in burns may be divided into :
A) Causes of immediate death :
These are (1) neurogenic shock (primary shock), (2) hypovolaemic
shock (secondary shock), (3) suffocation, due to inhaled CO, CO2,
(4) cyanide intoxication, (5) fat embolism, (6) cerebral or pulmonary
edema, and (7) accidental injuries during burn.
B) Causes of delayed death :
These are : (1) renal failure (acute tubular necrosis), (2) infections
(sepsis, gangrene, tetanus) and (3) centrilobular necrosis of liver.
666. Pure motor palsy seen in poisoning of
 a) Lead poisoning

 b) Arsenic poisoning

 c) Cocaine poisoning

 d) Cannabis poisoning



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'A' i.e., Lead poisoning
The peripheral neuropathy of lead toxicity is a pure motor
neuropathy affecting the upper limbs more than the lower limbs,
presenting as symmetric or asymmetric wrist drop. The weakness
may also involve other muscle groups of the distal upper extremities,
the involvement of lower extremities, including isolated foot drop,
also may occur.
667. True about strychnine poisoning is :
 a) All muscles affected at the same time

 b) Shoulder girdle affected first

 c) Pelvic girdle affected first

 d) None of the above



Correct Answer - A
A i.e. All muscles affected at same time
  668. Wrong about dhatura seeds is ?
    a) Kidney shaped

    b) Odourless

    c) Yellow brown

    d) Convex smooth surface



   Correct Answer - D
   Ans. is 'd' i.e.,Convex smooth surface [Ref Pilley 4th/e p. 207;
   Gautam Biswas 2"d /e p. 496]
   Features of Dhatura sees are :-
1. Large & thick
2. Odourlers
3. Kidney - shaped
4. Laterally compressed and double edged at convex border (not
   smooth)
5. Yellowisk brown
6. Bitter
669. True about acid poisoning is
 a) Greatest damage is along the lesser curvature

 b) Corrosives cause vaporization of tissues

 c) Vitriolage means ingestion of acid in empty stomach

 d) Highest chance of perforation is with nitric acid



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Greatest damage is along the lesser curvature
Magenstrasse is the term applied to the pathway acidic agents
follow in stomach. The pathway of acids and alkalis in food filled
stomach starts along the lesser curvature of the stomach and leads
to the pylorus, which explains the location of greatest damage in
food filled stomach. Stomach without food have significant injury in
the lower half of two thirds and may have sparing of fundus.
Mechanism of action :- Corrosives fix, destroy and erode the surface
with which they come in contact. They mainly act locally by :
Hygroscopic extraction of water from tissues
Coagulation of proteins and
Conversion of haemoglobin into hematin.
Titriolage' is throwing of any corrosive on another person. Eyes are
affected most commonly. It comes under sector 320 IPS.
There are highest chances of perforation of stomach with 11,SO4,
among all mineral acids.
670.
Highest content of cannabis is found in which
part of the plant?
 a) Root

 b) Resin

 c) Seed

 d) Stem



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is `b' i.e.,Resin [Ref Reddy 26th /e p. 528]
Cannabis, also known as marijuana, is obtained from the Indian
Hemp plant or cannabis indica (Cannabis sativa).
The active principles of Cannabis are contained in its resin.
All parts of the plant, male or female, contain the active material,
except stem, root and seeds.
The principal constituent of the resin are cannabinol, which has no
action.
Cannabidiol is also inert, but on exposure to heat, it is partly
converted to the very active isomeric tetrahydrocannabinols (THC).
671. All of the following are CNS stimulants
     except?
a) Amphetamines

b) Benzodiazepines

c) Cocaine

d) Methylphenidate



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Benzodiazepines
CNS stimulants are amphetamine, methylphenidate, atomoxetine,
modafinil, cocaine, pemoline and caffeine.
672. Nux vomica seeds contain 2 alkaloids,
     strychnine and :
 a) Hyoscine

 b) Hyoscyamine

 c) Brucine

 d) Atropine



Correct Answer - C
C i.e. Brucine
673. A sea snake is:
 a) Neurotoxic

 b) Hemotoxic

 c) Musculotoxic

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - C
C i.e. Musculo toxic
674. 'Cold Turkey' term is used to denote
     which of the following?
 a) Consumption of heroin

 b) Abrupt cessation of heroin

 c) Gradual withdrawal of heroin

 d) Place to withdraw a drug in a group



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Abrupt cessation of heroin [Ref Quitting Smoking
for Life p. 18]
'Cold Turkey' means abrupt and complete cessation of taking a drug
to which one is addiced.
Alcohol is not the only drug whereby quitting cold turkey poses a
danger to the patient. People who are addicted to opiates (heroin,
methadone, morphine, Suboxone, and even prescription
benzodiazepines) are at immense risk if they try to stop their drug
intake without a plan.
675. All are true of opioid withdrawal, except:
     NIMHANS 10; PGI 14
 a) Yawning

 b) Hallucinations

 c) Lacrimation

 d) Piloerection



Correct Answer - B
Ans. Hallucinations
676. Smoky stool is seen in which poisoning?
 a) Phosphorus

 b) Arsenic

 c) Lead

 d) Zinc



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Phosphorus [Ref Modern Medical Toxicology by
Pillay p. 68]
Acute poisoning of phosphorus :?
Breath smells of garlic.
Vomitus and stools may be luminous in the dark.
Smoky stool syndrome :- Faint fumes may emanate from the stools.
Manifestations of liver damage - tender hepatomegaly, jaundice
which may progress to an olive green hue, flapping tremor of hands
(asterixis), mousy odour to the breath (foetor hepaticus).
677. Gigantin is active principle of
 a) Plumbago Rosea

 b) Calotropis

 c) Ricinus Communis

 d) P. Zeylanica



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Calotropis [Ref Concise Textbook of FMT -
Sharma p. 250]
Calotropis gigantea -4 contains active principle named gigantin.
When cut, stem and leaves of the plant exrude an acrid milky juice.
When this juice is allowed to stand or heated, serum is exuded
leaving behind white clot.
The serum contains the active principle named gigantin which is
very toxic.
678. Which of the following is true about
     cocaine metabolite test
 a) Measure benzoylecgonine levels

 b) Used to diagnose cocaine use

 c) Treatment of cocaine overdose

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., All of the above [Ref Code of Federal Regulations
p. 174]
Cocaine and cocaine metabolite test system :
A cocaine and cocaine metabolite test system is a device intended
to measure cocaine and a cocaine metabolite (benzoylecgoonine) in
serum, plasma, and urine.
Measurements obtained by this device are used in the diagnosis and
treatment of cocaine use or overdose.
679. Active ingredient of marking nut is ?
 a) Semecarpol

 b) Crotin

 c) Abrin

 d) None



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Semecarpol
Semicarpus anacardium or marking nut or bhilawan
Its seed are heart shaped, conical and black with acrid oily juice
which is brownish but turns black on exposure to air.
Active principles are semecarpol and bhilawanol.
Juice applied to skin produces irritation, painful blisters followed by
itching and eczema. Therefore it is used to produce artificial bruises.
It is also used by washerman to mark clothes.
680. Who is the father of modern
     Microbiology?
 a) Metchnikoff

 b) Lord Lister

 c) Louis Pasteur

 d) Robert Koch



Correct Answer - C
Father of Modern Microbiology : Louis Pasteur.
Father of Medical Microbiology : Robert Koch.
Father of Pathology : Rudolph Virchow.
681. Which of the following statement regarding cell division is NOT TRUE?
 a) Produces haploid number of chromosomes

 b) Produces same number of chromosomes

 c) Produces 2 cells

 d) None of the above



Correct Answer - A
Mitosis is a nuclear division in which daughter cells receive the same number of
chromosomes as that of parent cell. The daughter cells resulting from mitosis are identical
to each other and also to the parent cell in the quantity and quality of genetic material.

Mitosis:
It is the process that facilitates equal partitioning of replicated chromosomes into two
identical groups.
As a result of this two new daughter cells arise from one original cell.
All the cells created through mitosis are genetically identical to one another and to the cell
from where they came.
The main purpose of mitosis in eukaryotic cells are growth of the individual, repair of tissue
and asexual reproduction.
   682. All of the following are important
        mechanisms of gene transfer in bacteria,
        except ?
    a) Lateral gene transfer

    b) Conjugation

    c) Vertical gene transfer

    d) Horizontal gene transfer



   Correct Answer - C
   Ans. is 'c' i.e., Vertical gene transfer
   Gene transfer
   Gene transfer refers to the process of genetic material (e.g. DNA)
   being sent and received among two organisms-* Donor sends and
   recipient receives the genetic material.
   There are two processes of gene transfer :?
   1. Horizontal gene transfer (HGT) or lateral gene transfer
   Horizontal gene transfer is the process by which genetic material is
   passed between two different organism,i.e. organism of different
   species.
   The recipient is not the offspring of donor.
   The most important example is gene transfer between the bacteria.
   The processes of horizontal gene transfer in bacteria are :-
1. Transduction
2. Transformation
3. Conjugation
   2. Vertical gene transfer
   Vertical gene transfer is the process of transferring genetic material
   to organism of same species, i.e. donor recieves genetic material
from its ancestor, e.g. its parent or a species from which it evolved.
Therefore, the donor will have the same general makeup as the
parents.
Vertical gene transfer is "a mix of two parents", i.e. when two
organisms mate, their genes are vertically transfered to their spawn.
This process is not important in bacteria.
   683. Natural method of horizontal gene
        transfer among bacteria includes -
    a) Electroporation

    b) Transduction

    c) Transformation

    d) b and c



   Correct Answer - D
   Ans. is 'b' i.e., Transduction; 'c' i.e., Transformation
   Gene transfer
   Gene transfer refers to the process of genetic material (e.g. DNA)
   being sent and received among two organisms ---> Donor sends
   and recipient receives the genetic material.
   There are two processes of gene transfer :?
   1) Horizontal gene transfer (HGT) or lateral gene transfer
   Horizontal gene transfer is the process by which genetic material is
   passed between two different organism, i.e. organism of different
   species.
   The recipient is not the offspring of donor.
   The most important example is gene transfer between the bacteria.
   The processes of horizontal gene transfer in bacteria are :-
1. Transduction
2. Transformation
3. Conjugation
   2) Vertical gene transfer
   Vertical gene transfer is the process of transferring genetic material
   to organism of same species, i.e. donor recieves genetic material
   from its ancestor, e.g. its parent or a species from which it evolved.
   Therefore, the donor will have the same general makeup as the
parents.
Vertical gene transfer is "a mix of two parents", i.e. when two
organisms mate, their genes are vertically transfered to their spawn.
This process is not important in bacteria.
684. All culture media are used for antibiotic
     susceptibility except -
 a) Tetrathionate-F

 b) Blood agar

 c) Chocolate agar

 d) Muller-Hinton agar



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Tetrathionate-F
* The Kirby-Bauer disk diffusion method is one of the most widely
practiced antimicrobial susceptibility tests (AST).
* It is affected by many factors among which are the media used.
* Mueller-Hinton agar (MHA) is the standard medium recommended
in guidelines.
* Mueller-Hinton has a few properties that make it excellent
for antibiotic use. ...
  - Starch is known to absorb toxins released from bacteria, so that
they cannot interfere with the antibiotics.
  - Second, it is a loose agar. This allows for better diffusion of
the antibiotics than most other plates.
685. Loeffer's serum is an example of
 a) Basal medium

 b) Simple medium

 c) Complex medium

 d) Enrichment medium



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Complex medium [Ref Ananthanarayan 8th/e.p.
140]
Loeffler's medium is an enriched medium → A type of special
(complex) medium.
686. To create anaerobiosis which organism
     is used
 a) Micrococcus

 b) Clostridium

 c) B. anthracis

 d) Corynebacterium



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Micrococcus
Obligate aerobic micrococcus is used to create anaerobic condition
(anaerobiosis).
The micrococcus and the anaerobic organism to be cultivated are
both inoculated into the same liquid medium.
During incubation the Micrococcus gradually utilizes the free oxygen
creating conditions favorable for the growth of anaerobe.
After anaerobiosis is achieved, the micrococcus dies (due to lack of
oxygen) leaving the anaerobe in pure culture.
687. Savlon contains
 a) Cetrimide + Chlorhexidine

 b) Cetrimide + Chlorhexidine + butyl alcohol

 c) Cetrimide + butyl alcohol

 d) Cetrimide + Cetavlon



Correct Answer - A
Ans : A.Cetrimide + chlorhexidine [Ref KDT pharmacology 6/e,
p 861, 860; Park 20/e, p 117]
Savlon contains - Chlorhexidine gluconate (hibitane) + Cetrimide
(cetavlon) in various percentages Savlon liquid antiseptic -
chlorhexidine gluconate 1.5% + cetrimide 3%
Savlon cream - chlorhexidine HC1 0.1% + cetrimide 0.5%
Savlon hospital concentrate - chlorhexidine gluconate 7.5% +
cetrimide 15%
Other antiseptic and disinfectants of importance:
Betadine - povidone (polyvinylpyrrolidone) iodine
Dettol - chloroxylenol 4.8% in 9% terpinol & 13% alcohol
Dakin's solution - Diluted sodium hypochlorite solution buffered with
boric acid. Available chlorine is 0.5%.
Eusol - Solution of chlorinated lime (1.25%) + boric acid (L25%)
0.4% available chlorine
Dakin's solution & Eusol dissolve pus & necrotic tissue in addition to
being germicidal. So used in cleaning of infected wound.
688. Which of the following is a method of
     Pasteurization
 a) Vat method

 b) Pasteur method

 c) Billing method

 d) Flash method



Correct Answer - A:D
Ans. is 'a & d' i.e., Vat method & Flash method [Ref Park 23ra/e
p. 655]
Pasteurization is done to destroy the pathogens in milk. It kills nearly
90% of bacteria in milk, including more heat resistant tubercular
bacilli and Q-fever organism. However, thermoduric bacteria and
spores are not killed.
There are following methods of pasteurization :?
A) Holder method (Vat method)
Milk is kept at 63-66° C for 30 minutes and then rapidly cooled to
5°C.
B) High temperature short time (HTST) method
It is also called Flash method. Milk is heated to 72°C for 15 seconds
and then rapidly cooled to 4°C.
It is now the most widely used method.
C) Ultra-high temperature (UHT) method
Milk is rapidly heated in two stages to 125° C for few seconds,
2"d stage being under pressure. It is then rapidly cooled.
Method             Remarks
Holder/Vat         For small and rural
Method             communities
HTST (flash) Most widely used, for large
HTST (flash)   Most widely used, for large
Method         quantities
               Heating in 2 stages
UHT Method
               2'd stage under pressure
689. Temperature used in Tyndallizaton
 a) 40°C

 b) 60°C

 c) 80°C

 d) 100°C



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., 100°C [Ref Ananthanarayan 9thie p. 31 &
trie p. 33]
Tyndallization (intermittent sterilization)
Media containing sugar or gelatin are sterilized by heating at 100°C
for 20 minutes on three successive days.
First exposure kills all vegetative bacteria.
Spores germinate and are killed on subsequent exposures
690. Laproscope is sterilized by ?
 a) 2% formalin

 b) 2% glutaraldehyde

 c) Autoclaving

 d) Boiling



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., 2% glutaraldehyde
All endoscopes (e.g. laproscope) are sterilized by 2% glutaraldehyde
(cidex).
691. Sterilization of culture media containing
     serum is by:
 a) Autoclaving

 b) Micropore filter

 c) Gamma radiation

 d) Gamma radiation



Correct Answer - A
Ans. (a) Autoclaving
692. Nutrient agar heated at 80°C used for
 a) Spore germination

 b) To grow mesophilic bacteria

 c) To grow thermophilic bacteria

 d) For clostridium isolation



Correct Answer - A:D
Ans. is 'a' > 'd' i.e., Spore germination > For clostridium
isolation
Heating for 20 minutes at 80 degrees centigrade destroys vegetative
cells and activates the spores for germination.
This method can be used to cultivate anaerobic spore-forming
organisms (e.g. clostridium)
About options a & c
Microorganisms can be grouped into broad (but not very precise)
categories, according to their temperature ranges for growth.
Psychrophiles (cold-loving) can grow at 0°C, and some even as low
as -10°C; their upper limit is often about 25°C.
Mesophlles grow in the moderate temperature range, from about
20°C (or lower) to 45°C.
Thermophiles are heat-loving, with an optimum growth temperature
of 50° or more, a maximum of up to 70°C or more, and a minimum of
about 20°C.
Hyperthermophiles have an optimum above 75°C and thus can grow
at the highest temperatures tolerated by any organism. An extreme
example is the genus Pyrodictium, found on geothermally heated
areas of the sea bed. It has a temperature minimum of 82°, an
optimum of 105° and a growth maximum of 110°C.
693. Involutional form are seen in which
     phase of bacterial growth
 a) Lag phase

 b) Log phase

 c) Stationary phase

 d) Death phase



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Death phase [Ref Ananthanarayan 94Ve p. 22]
Bacterial growth is the division of one bacterium into two daughter
cells in a process called binary fission. Providing no mutational event
occurs, the resulting daughter cells are genetically identical to the
original cell.
Hence "Local doubling" of the bacterial population occurs. Bacteria
have a distinct pattern of growth when a bacterium is seeded into a
suitable liquid medium and incubated, its growth follows a definite
course.
694. Partial acid fast organism is
 a) M. tuberculosis

 b) M. Bovis

 c) Nocardia

 d) None



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Nocardia [Ref Concise Review of microbiology p.
13]
Portial acid fast means, organism which is shows less affinity for
primary stain, thus less concentrated H2So4 (instead of 20% H2So4)
is used for decolorization of primary stain (Carbol fuschin).
Partial acid fast bacteria are M leprae (5% H,SO4), and Nocardia
(0.5% H2SO4)
695. Resolving power of electron microscope
 a) 1-5 mm

 b) 1-5 um

 c) 1-5 nm

 d) 1-5 A°



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e.,1-5 Ae [Ref Essentials of medical microbiology]
696. Classification of staphylococcus is
     based on -
 a) Catalase test

 b) Coagulase test

 c) Mannitol fermentation

 d) Optochin sensitivity



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Coagulase test
Medically important staphylococci that cause human disease
are divided into two groups:?
Coagulase positive: Staphylococcus aureus.
Coagulase-negative: Staphylococcus epidermidis, Staphylococcus
haemolyticus, Staphylococcus saprophyticus.
697. Iron helps in virulence of which
     organism
 a) Streptococcus pyogenes

 b) Pneumococcus

 c) Staphylococcus aureus

 d) Pseudomonas



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Staphylococcus aureus
Staphylococcus aureus causes a significant amount of human
morbidity and mortality.
The ability of S.aureus to cause disease is dependent upon its
acquisition of iron from the host.
S. aureus can obtain iron from various sources during infection,
including haem and transferrin.
The most abundant iron source in humans is haem iron bound by
haemoglobin contained within erythrocytes.
S. aureus is known to lyre erythrocytes through secretion of pore-
forming toxins, providing access to host haemoglobin.
Proteins of the iron-regulated surface determinant (Isd) system bind
host hemoproteins, remove the haem cofactor, and shuttle haem
into the cytoplasm for use as a nutrient iron source.
Deletion of Isd system components decreases staphylococcal
virulence, underscoring the importance of haem iron acquisition
during infection.
In addition to haem, S. aureus can utilize transferrin iron through the
secretion of siderophores.
Several staphylococcal siderophores have been described, some of
which have defined roles during the pathogenesis of staphylococcal
infections.
698. All are true about listeria except:
 a) Gram positive

 b) PALCAM agar is used for isolation

 c) Characteristic tumbling motility at 37°C

 d) Umbrella shaped growth



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is. 'c' i. e., Characteristic tumbling motility at 37°C
L. monocytogenes is a gram-positive'
coccobacillus'(coccoid rod) with a tendency to occur in chains.
Peritrichous flagella are produced by the bacillus optimally at 20-
30°C but only scantily or not at all at 37°C
Culture media used for isolation are blood agar, chocolate agar,
and PALCAM agar.
It grows on ordinary media within a temperature range of 1° to 45°C.
Most cases of human disease are caused by serotypes 1/2a, 1/2b
and 4b.
The organism can be found as a part of the gastrointestinal flora in
healthy individuals.
Human disease due to L. monocytogenes generally occurs in the
setting of pregnancy or immunosuppression.
699. DOC for listeria meningitis -
 a) Ampicillin

 b) Cefotaxime

 c) Cefotriaxone

 d) Ciprofloxacin



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Ampicillin
The antibiotic of choice for listeria infection is ampicillin or penicillin
G.
700. Which of the following is not mechanism
     for resistance to MRSA -
 a) Resistance is chromosomally mediated

 b) Produced mainly by alteration in PBPs

 c) MRSA resistance is absolutely beta-lactamase independent

 d) Intrinsic resistance is known



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., MRSA resistance is absolutely beta-lactamhhase
independent
701. Wool-Sorter disease is caused by
 a) Pseudomonas

 b) Bacillus anthracis

 c) Vibrio parahemolyticus

 d) Spirillus minor



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Bacillus anthracis [Ref Harrison 19(h/e p. 261;
Ananthnarayan /e p. 246]
Bacillus Anthracis is the causative organism of anthrax.
In human, anthrax occurs in following forms ?
Cutaneous anthrax (Hide porter's disease)
It is the most common form of anthrax. It is a painless lesion and is
called charbon or malignant pustule. It generally resolves
spontaneously, but 10-20% of untreated patients may develop fatal
septicemia.
Pulmonary anthrax (Wool sorter's disease)
It follows inhalation of dust from infected wool. It presents as
hemorrhagic pneumonia.
Intestinal anthrax is rarest form.
702. All are true about cutaneous anthrax
     except ?
 a) Extremely painful

 b) The whole area is congested and edematous

 c) Central crustation with black eschar

 d) Satellite nodule around inguinal region



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Extremely painful
Cutaneous anthrax is painless.
703. Capsule of Bacillus anthracis is formed
     of:
 a) Polysaccharide

 b) Lipopolysaccharide

 c) Polypeptide

 d) Long chain fatty acids



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is. 'c' i. e. Polypeptide
704. Fishy odour is found on growth of which
     organism
 a) Proteus

 b) Pseudomonas

 c) Yersinia pseudotuberculosis

 d) Yersinia pestis



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Proteus
Proteus is part of the normal flora of the human gastrointestinal
tract. It can also be found free-living in water and soil. When this
organism, however, enters the urinary tract, wounds, or the lungs
it can become pathogenic
Culture of proteus bacilli has a characteristic putrefactive odor
described as 'fishy or seminal".
Rotten cooked fishy odor: Proteus mirabilis produces a very
distinct fishy odor. On Salmonella-Shigella (SS)
agar, Proteus usually smells like “rotten cooked fish”.
705. Confirmatory test for Syphilis is:
     September 2010 March 2013
 a) VDRL

 b) Rapid plasma reagin test

 c) FT-ABS

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C: FT-ABS
T. pallidum cannot be grown in vitro
Diagnostic tests for syphilis: Tests include serologic tests for syphilis
(STS), which consist of screening (reaginic) and confirmatory
(treponemal) tests, and dark field microscopy.
Reaginic tests use lipid antigens (cardiolipin from bovine hearts) to
detect reagin (human antibodies that bind to lipids). The Venereal
Disease Research Laboratory (VDRL) and rapid plasma reagin
(RPR) tests are sensitive, simple, and inexpensive reaginic tests that
are used for screening but are not specific for syphilis. Results may
be presented qualitatively (e.g., reactive, weakly reactive, borderline,
or nonreactive) and quantitatively as titers (e.g., positive at 1:16
dilution).
Many disorders other than treponemal infections (e.g., SLE,
antiphospholipid antibody syndromes) can produce a positive
(biologically false-positive) reagin test result. CSF
reaginic tests are reasonably sensitive for early disease but less so
for late neurosyphilis. CSF reagin tests can be used to diagnose
neurosyphilis or to monitor response to treatment by measuring
antibody titers.
Treponemal tests detect antitreponemal antibodies qualitatively
and are very specific for syphilis. They include the following:
Fluorescent treponemal antibody absorption (FTA-ABS) test
Microhemagglutination assay for antibodies to T. pallidum (MHA-TP)
T. pallidum hemagglutination assay (TPHA)
706. Rapid detection of meningococal
     meningitis is
 a) Blood culture

 b) CSF culture

 c) PCR

 d) None



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., PCR [Ref Basic in microbiology p. 719]
"PCR assay can be performed rapidly with a turnaround time of 2
hour from intiation of DNA extraction to the issuing of
reports". Laboratory diagnosis of meningococci
Specimens used are CSF (for cases), nasopharyngeal swab (for
carrier), blood (in meningococcemia & early meningitis), and
petechial lesions (in meningococcemia).
Best specimen for case 4 CSF (by lumbar puncture).
Best specimen for carrier 4 Naspharyngeal swab.
707. Presumptive diagnosis of
     meningococcal meningitis is made
     earliest by -
 a) CSF culture

 b) PCR

 c) Latex agglutination

 d) CFT



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Latex agglutination [Ref Essentials of medical
microbiologyr3 d/e p. 412]
In combination with a clinical picture CSF examination consistent
with bacterial meningitis, a presumptive diagnosis of bacterial
meningitis caused by N. meningitidis, S. pneumoniae, or H.
influenzae can by made after performing a Gram stain of the CSF
sediment or by detection of specific antigens in the CSF by a latex
agglutination test or using RDTs.
Positive results for any of these tests can rapidly provide evidence of
infection even if cultures fail to grow. PCR and CSF culture are used
for definitive diagnosis (not presumptive diagnosis)
708. Legionnaire disease is caused by?
 a) Motile gram positive

 b) Motile gram negative

 c) Non-motile gram positive

 d) Non-motile gram negative



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Motile gram-negative
Legionella is a gram-negative, non-capsulated coccobacillus which
is motile by polar or subpolar Flagella.
Legionella causes the following infections :
A) Pulmonary infections
There are two types of pulmonary infections:-
1. Pontiac Fever: It is self-limiting flu-like illness with incubation
period 24-48 hours. There is no pneumonia.
2. Legionnaires Disease:
It is atypical pneumonia with an incubation period of 2-l0 days.
It is characterized by cough. chest pain, hemoptysis, high-grade
fever, diarrhoea, confusion, 'relative bradycardia and hyponatremia'.
If the onset of symptoms occurs within 10 days of discharge from the
hospital, nosocomial legionnaire's disease should be suspected.
Extrapulmonary infections
 The most common site of infection is the
heart (myocarditis/pericarditis/endocarditis).
709. Pontiac fever is caused by:
 a) Legionella

 b) Listeria

 c) Scrub typhus

 d) Leptospira

 e) Rickettsia



Correct Answer - A
Ans. (a) Legionella
Pontiac fever is a mild nonfatal influenza like illness caused by
Legionella pneumophila.
Pontiac fex c,
An acute self limiting flue like illness with IP of 24-48 hours
Malaise, fatigue and myalgia are the most frequent presenting
symptoms
Pneumonia doesn't develop.
Complete recovery takes place, without antibiotic therapy.
Diagnosis is established by antibody detection.
710. Sewer swabs are taken to detect
 a) Typhoid cases in community

 b) Cholera cases in community

 c) Typhoid carriers in community

 d) Cholera carriers in community



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Typhoid carriers in community [Ref Textbook of
practical Microbiology p. 721]
Typhoid carriers are detected by Sewer-swab method'.
The use of sewer swabs enables premises to be screened for the
possibility of the existence of a salmonella problem more quickly and
more easily than by the examination of many end-of-line samples.
In the event of salmonellae being found, a return visit can be paid
and detailed samples taken to attempt to defect the source of
contamination.
711. Species of shigella causing arthritis
 a) Sh dysenteriae-1

 b) Sh sonnei

 c) Sh flexneri

 d) Sh boydii



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Sh flexneri [Ref Harrison 18th/e p. 945]
Shigella is highly communicable. The infective dose for shigella is
less. It can be as low as 10-100 bacilli because they survive gastric
acidity better than other enterobacteriae.
Shigellae produce follwing clinical features.
1) Intestinal : These are :-
Dysentery : Most common cause is Sh dyenteriae typel.
Diarrhea : Usually by Sh Sonnei.
2) Extraintestinal : These are hemolytic uremic syndrome (caused by
Sh dysenteriae-I), arthritis (Sh flexneri), seizures (Sh flexneri),
pneumonia and Reiter syndrome (in HLA B27 association).
712. Griffth classification is base on
 a) 'C'-carbohydrate

 b) M, T, R antigens

 c) Type of hemolysis

 d) 0, requirment



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., M, T, R antigens [Ref Ananthanarayan
9th/e p. 209, 210]
Group 'A' strep. are further subdivided into types based on the
protein (M, T and R) antigens present on the cell surface (Griffith
typing). About 80 types of str. pyogenes have been recognized.
713. How does chlamydia differ from other
     usual bacteria?
 a) Lack cell wall

 b) Cannot grow in cell free culture media

 c) Contains inclusion body

 d) None of the above



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Contains inclusion body
Chlamydia produces basophilic (intracytoplasmic) inclusion bodies in
infected cells in contrast to eosinophilic inclusion bodies produced
by most viruses and hence they are sometimes referred to as
Basophilic viruses.
Unique properties of chlamydiae are
Chlamydia is an obligate intracellular parasite. This means they can
survive only by establishig residence inside animal cells
They need their host's ATP as an energy source for their own
cellular activity. They are energy parasites using a cell membrane
transport system that uses ATP from the host system and gives out
ADP.
This obligate intracellular existence makes it impossible to culture
these organisms on nonliving artificial media. Due to their small size
and failure to grow in cell - free media they were considered to be
viruses.
Chlamydiae grows in cultures of a variety of eukaryotic cell lines Mc
Coy or HeLa cells. It may be necessary to treat cells with polyanionic
compounds such as DEAD-dextran to reduce the electrostatic
barrier to infection. Antimetabolite such as cycloheximide is added to
favour competition for host cell amino acid pools. All types of
   chlamydiae proliferate in embryonated eggs particulary in the yolk
   sac.
   The special features in structure and chemical composition of
   chlamydiae are:
1. The outer cell wall resembles the cell wall of gram negative bacteria
2. It has a relatively high lipid content
3. It is rigid but it does not contain typical bacterial peptidoglycan;
   perhaps it contain a tetrapeptide linked matrix.
4. N Acetylmuramic acid also appears to be absent from chlamydiae
   cell wall.
714. Similarity between chlamydia and virus
     is
 a) Filterable through filter

 b) Ability to grow in cell free media

 c) Contains both DNA and RNA

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e.,Filterable through filter [Ref Textbook of
microbiology by Parija p. 418]
Chlamydiae were thought to be viruses because (like viruses)
they :
Pass through 0.45 ym filters.
Are obligate intracellular parasite - cannot be grown in cell free
media.
715. Chlamydia trachomatis infection
     commonly causes:
     March 2004
 a) Infertility

 b) Post coital bleeding

 c) Amenorrhoea

 d) Malignancy



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A i.e. Infertility
716. Which test cannot differentiate endemic
     and epidemic typhus
 a) Weil-Felix reaction

 b) Complement fixation test

 c) Immunofluorescence

 d) Radio precipitation



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Weil-Felix reaction
Both epidemic typhus and endemic typhus are positive for OX-19
antigen → Thus Weil Felix reaction cannot differentiate between the
two.
Weil-Felix reaction
This reaction is an agglutination test in which sera are tested for
agglutinins to 0 antigens of certain nonmotile proteus strains OX- 19,
OX - 2 and OX - K.
The basis of the test is the sharing of an alkali - stable carbohydrate
antigen by some rickettsiae and by certain strains of proteus, P.
vulgaris OX - 19 and OX - 2 and P. mirabilis OX - K.
The test is usually done as a tube agglutination, though rapid slide
agglutination methods have been employed for screening.
717. E. coli subtypes are divided on the basis
     of
 a) Lactose fermentation

 b) Virulence properties

 c) Somatic 0 antigen

 d) Maltose fermentation



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Virulence properties [Ref en wikipedia.org]
Enteric E.coli (EC) are classified on the basis of serological
characteristics and virulence properties :?
Enteropathogenic E. coli (Enteroadherent E coli)
Enterohemorrhagic E.coli or verotoxigenic E.coli
Enterotoxigenic E. coli
Enteroaggregative E. coli
Enteroinvasive E. coli
718. A 20 year old man presented with
     abdominal pain, vomiting and bloody
     diarrhea, his stool sample grew
     Escherichia coli in pure culture. Which of
     the following serotype of E.coli is the
     causative agent of hemorrhagic colitis?
 a) O 157:H7

 b) O 159:H7

 c) O 107:H7

 d) O 55:H7



Correct Answer - A
Enterohemorrhagic E.coli O157:H7 is the serotype of E.coli causing
hemorrhagic colitis.

It is associated with the ingestion of undercooked hamburger,
sprouts, unpasteurized milk or juice.
EHEC produces a shiga toxin and can cause colitis after an
incubation period of 3 -5 days.
It typically produces watery diarrhea that progress to bloody diarrhea
after a few hours to few days.
Fatigue, abdominal pain, nausea and vomiting are associated
complaints.

Mechanism of enterohemorrhagic colitis appears to be vascular
endothelial damage that leads to platelet aggregation and initiation
of the coagulation cascade. This in turn, leads to ischemia of the
colon and results in hemorrhagic colitis.

Ref: Mayo Clinic Gastroenterology and Hepatology Board Review
By Stephen Hauser, 4th Edition, Page 197
719. ELISA test for virulence antigen is used
     for which type of E coli
 a) ETEC

 b) EIEC

 c) EHEC

 d) EAEC



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., EIEC [Ref Ananthnarayan 9th/e p. 279]
For laboratory diagnosis of EIEC, the Sereny test used to be
employed (that is, instillation of suspension of freshly isolated EIEC
or shigella into the eyes of guinea pigs leads to mucopurulent
conjunctivities and severe keratitis).
Mice may be used instead of guinea pigs. Cell penetration of HeLa
or HEP-2 cells in culture is a more humane diagnostic test.
This ability to penetrate cells is determined by a large plasmid,
detection of which can also be a diagnostic test. The plasmid codes
for outer membrane antigens called the 'virulence marker antigens'
(VMA) which can be detected by the ELISA (VMA ELISA) test.
720. E. coli infection occur in which enzyme
     defect
 a) Lactase

 b) Pyruvate kinase

 c) Pepsin

 d) Trypsin



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Pyruvate kinase [Ref Hardcore microbiology &
immunology by Benjamin W Sears p. 133]
Opportunistic infections is immunodeficiency due to defect in
myeloid cells are :-
Staph aureus
Klebsiella
Pneumococcus
E. coli
Neisseria
Candida
Conditions causing defect in myeloid cells are :?
Chronic granulomatous disease
Chediak-Higashi syndrome
G6PD and pyruvate kinase deficiency
Myeloperoxidase deficiency
721. Culture media containing potassium
     tellurite
 a) TCBS medium

 b) Monsur medium

 c) BYCE medium

 d) Muller Hinton agar



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Monsur medium [Ref Fundamental principles of
bacteriology p. 129]
Monsur's GTTA medium is Monsur's gelatin tourocholate
trypticase tellurite agar. Selective media for vibrio cholarae
TCBS medium (pH 8.6) : This medium contains thiosulfate, citrate,
bile salts, sucrose, and bromothymol blue (indicator). V. cholerae
produces large, yellow convex colonies on this medium.
This is due to fermentation of sucrose by the bacteria, leading to
production of acid. Accumulation of acid reduces pH of the medium,
and so the color of the bromothymol blue indicator becomes yellow,
thus making V. cholerae colonies yellow. Non sucrose-fermenting V.
parahaemolyricus produces blue green colonies.
Monsur's GTTA medium (pH 8.5): High pH of the medium and
presence of potassium tellurite in this medium inhibits most of Gram
positive bacteria and enteric bacteria with exception of proteus
species.
Hence, the GTTA medium is used for isolation of V. cholerae and
other vibrios from feces. V. cholerae produces small translucent
colonies with grayish black cencer and a turbid halo after 24 hours of
incubation. The colonies become larger (3-4 mm in size) after a
prolonged incubation of 48 hours.
Alkaline BSA (pH 8.2) : This is another selective medium used for V.
cholerae. The colonies on BSA are similar to those on nutrient agar.
722. Borrelia causes which of the following
 a) Weil's disease

 b) Bejels

 c) Vincent angina

 d) Yaws



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Vincent angina
Three important diseases caused by Borreliae are :?
Lyme disease : Caused by B. burgdorferi
Relapsing fever : Caused by B. recurrentis, B duttoni, B. hermsii, B.
Parkeri, B. turicatae, B. persica, B. hispanica.
Vincent's angina : Caused by B. vincenti.
723. Which of the following is most active
     against slowly dividing tubercular bacilli
     ?
 a) Isoniazid

 b) Rifampicin

 c) Streptomycin

 d) Ethambutol



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Rifampicin
724. Generation time for M tuberculosis
 a) 10-15 min

 b) 10-15 hours

 c) 10-15 days

 d) 5-10 days



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., 10-15 hours [Ref Ananthanarayan 8th/e p. 365]
Generation time of lepra bacillus → 4 12-13 days
Generation time of tubercle bacillus → 14 hours
Generation time of coliform bacilli → 20 minutes
725. Gonococci has affinity for :
a) Columnar epithelium

b) Glandular epithelium

c) Stratified sqamous epithelium

d) Squamous epithelium



Correct Answer - A
Columnar epithelium
726. Which of the following agents is most commonly associated with recurrent
     meningitis due to CSF leaks?

 a) Meningococci

 b) Pneumococci

 c) Hemophilus Influenza

 d) E. Coli



Correct Answer - B
Intracranial CSF leaks cause bacterial meningitis, about 80% are caused by S.
Pneumoniae. Other causative organisms are meningococcus, Hemophilus species and
S.aurues.

Ref: Clinical Pediatric Neurology By Ronald B. David, Page 217
727. True about vibrio cholerae is -
 a) Disease more common in woman

 b) Classical vibrio protect against development of 0-139 Tor is
    milder than classical

 c) El - Tor is milder than classical

 d) All



Correct Answer - C
El - Tor is milder than classical
728. Diphtheria toxin's mechanism of action
     is:
     September 2009
 a) Inhibiting glucose synthesis

 b) Inhibiting protein synthesis

 c) Promoting acetylcholine release

 d) Altering cyclic GMP levels



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B: Inhibiting protein synthesis
The diphtheria toxin causes the death eucaryotic cells and tissues
by inhibition of protein synthesis in the cells. Although the toxin is
responsible for the lethal symptoms of the disease, the virulence of
C. diphtheriae cannot be attributed to toxigenicity alone, since a
distinct invasive phase apparently precedes toxigenesis.
729. Stalactite growth in ghee broth is due to
     the following organism?
 a) Y.pestis

 b) T.palladium

 c) H.influenzae

 d) C.diphtheriae



Correct Answer - A
Cultural characteristics of Yersinia pestis:
1. When grown in a flask of broth with oil / ghee floated on top (ghee
broth) a characteristic growth occurs which hangs down into the
broth from the surface, resembling stalactite.
2. On nutrient agar, colonies are small, delicate, transparent discs,
becoming opaque on continued incubation.
3. On blood agar colonies are dark brown due to absorption of the
hemin pigment.
4. On MacConkey agar colourless colonies are formed.
5. In broth a flocculent growth occurs at the bottom and along the
sides of the tube.

Ref: Textbook of Microbiology Ananthanarayanan, 8th edition
  730. Cyst with scolex and hooks is seen in
    a) T. saginatu

    b) Fish tapeworm

    c) Echinococcus

    d) H. diminuta



   Correct Answer - C
   Ans. is 'c' i.e., Echinococcus [Ref: Clinical parasitology
   3rd/e p. 315]
   First one must understand the meaning of scolex. Scolex is pear-
   shaped or knoblike head of cystodes (tapeworms).
   Scolex is covered with suckers and hooks :-
1. Taenia solium : Scolex contains four suckers and rostellar hooks
   (rostellum with hooks).
2. Taenia saginata : Scolex contains four suckers but no
   hooks/rostellum (hookless).
3. H. Nana : Scolex contains four suckers and rostellum of hooks.
4. H. diminuta : Scolex contains four suckers but no hooks (hookless).
5. Echinococcus : Scolex contains suckers and rostellum of hooks.
6. Diphyllobothrium lotus : Scolex has two elongated sucking grooves
   (instead of suckers). There are no hooks (hookless).
731. E. coli is differentiated by E histolytica
     by presence of
 a) Very active movement

 b) Thin nuclear membrane

 c) Cyst with 1-4 nuclei

 d) Blunt pseudopodia



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Blunt pseudopodia [Ref: Essentials of medical
parasitology p. 37]
732. Pulmonary eosinophilia is found in
     infection with ?
 a) Babesia

 b) Malaria

 c) Strongyloides

 d) Trypanosoma



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Strongyloides [Ref Harrison 18th/e p. 2120 & 17th/e
p. 1610]
Ascaris
Strongyloides stercoralis
Ancylostoma (hook worm)
Wuchereria bancrofti or W. malayi
Toxocara
733. Adherence of E. histolytica to colonic
     mucosa is mediated by ?
 a) Fibronectin

 b) Lectin

 c) Collagen

 d) Fucose



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Lectin [Ref www.pathologyoutlines.com]
Pathophysiology of E. histolytica infection
Cyst are ingested from fecally contaminated food or water, sexual
transmission also occurs.
Excystation to 8 motile trophozoites occurs in the small intestine
The cysts are resistant to gastric acid (and chlorine in water
supplies).
Trophozoites are potentially invasive and multiply by binary fission.
In an estimated 20% of infections invasion into the wall of the colon
with tissue destruction occurs.
Adherence to colonic mucosa is mediated by a lectin on E.
histolytics's surface.
The parasite then induces apoptosis of epithelial cells through a
channel forming pore protein
 E. histolytica ingests remnant cells.
Some trophozoites undergo encystation through signalling pathways
completing the cycle.
734. Calabar swelling is produced by?
 a) Onchocerca volvulus

 b) Loa loa

 c) Burgia malayi

 d) Wuchereria bancrofti



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Loa - Loa
Loiasis
Loiasis is caused by L. Loa (the African eye worm)
Habitat of adult worms is subcutaneous connective tissue of man;
often in the sub-conjuctival tissue of the eye.
The worm passes its life cycle in two hosts :
1) Man & 2) Chrysops (Mango or deer flies)
C/Fs → Asymptomatic microfilaremia, Calabar (fugitive) swelling -
subcutaneous swelling, Nephropathy, Encephalopathy (rare),
Cardiomyopathy
Calabar swelling is due to hypersensitivity reaction to the adult
worm.
735.
Promastigote form of Leishmania is found in
which part of sandfly:
March 2005
 a) Lymph node

 b) GIT

 c) Spleen

 d) Bone marrow



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B: GIT
736. Which stage of Leishmania is found in
     spleen aspirate of patient ?
 a) Amastigote�

 b) Promastigote

 c) Epimastigote� �

 d) Trypomastigote



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Amastigote�[Ref Essentials of
parasitology�p.�122]
Amastigote forms, also known as Leishmania donovani bodies, are
found intracellularly in tissues like liver, spleen and bone marrow. A
positive bone marrow or spleen aspiration for L.donovani bodies
provides confirmation of diagnosis.
737. Maurer's dots are seen in which species
     of plasmodium?
 a) P ovale

 b) P vivax

 c) P falciparum

 d) P malariae



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., P. falciparum [Ref Chatterjee 12th/e p. 79-80]
P. vivax →           Schuffner's dot
P. malariae → Ziemann's stippling,
P. falciparum → Maurer's dot
P.ovale →            Schuffner's dot
738. Cholangiocarcinoma is caused by:
 a) Giardia lamblia

 b) Clonorchis infestation

 c) Paragonimus infestation

 d) Ascaris infestation



Correct Answer - B
Ans. b. Clonorchis infestation
739. Intermediate host is not required for
     which parasite -
 a) Toxoplasma

 b) Schistosoma

 c) Ancylostoma

 d) Fish tapeworm



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Ancylostoma [Ref Rajesh Karykarte p. 7]
The sequential stages in growth, development and multiplication
constitute its life cycle
740. Capsid of viral structure is:
a) Extracellular infectious particle

b) Protein coat around nucleic acid

c) Envelop around a virus

d) None of the above



Correct Answer - B
Ans. b. Protein coat around nucleic acid
741. Smallest DNA virus is?
 a) Herpes virus

 b) Adenovirus

 c) Parvovirus

 d) Poxvirus



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e. Parvovirus
Smallest virus (also smallest DNA virus) → Parvovirus.
Largest virus (also largest DNA virus) → Pox virus.
Smallest RNA virus → Picornavirus
Largest RNA virus → Paramyxoviridae.
742. All viruses are associated with specific
     inclusion body, except ?
 a) CMV

 b) Malluscum contagiosum

 c) EBV

 d) Yellow fever



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., EBV [Ref Essentials of medical microbiology p. 791]
  743. Hand foot mouth disease is caused by ?
    a) Enterovirus -70

    b) Coxsackie - A virus

    c) Coxsackie - B virus

    d) Enterovirus



   Correct Answer - B
   Ans. is 'b' i.e., Coxsackie -A virus [Ref Greenwood le/e p. 459;
   Ananthanarayan 9th/e p. 491]
   There are two types of Coxsackie viruses :
1. Coxsackie A (Seotypes 1 to 24) : They cause aseptic meningitis
   (especially A7 and A9), Herpangina, febrile illness, acute
   hemorrhagic conjucntivitis (by A24), and 'Hand-foot-mouth disease'.
2. Coxsackie B (Sterotypes 1 to 6): They cause aseptic meningitis (all
   serotypes), neonatal disease, Bornholm disease (plurodynia or
   epidemic myalgia), myocarditis, hepatitis, pancreatitis & DM
   (serotype B4), and pneumonia.
744. Rash of chickenpox can be differentiated
     from the rash of small pox by all except ?
 a) Pleomorphic

 b) Centripetal

 c) Deep-seated

 d) Unilocular



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Deep-seated
Rash of chickenpox is superficial (not deep seated).
745. HSV-2 (Herpes simplex) causes ?
 a) Oral ulcers

 b) Genital ulcers

 c) U.T.I.

 d) Pharyngitis



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Genital ulcer
746. HSV-2 causes latent infection in which
     nerve plexus/ ganglia ?
 a) Trigeminal ganglion

 b) Otic ganglion

 c) Sacral ganglion

 d) Ciliary ganglion



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Sacral ganglion [Ref Essentials of medical
microbiology 3'/e p. 1215]
Site of latency
HSV-1→ Trigeminal ganglion.
HSV-2 → Sacral ganglion.
747. Which of the following is Hepadnavirus ?
 a) HAV��

 b) HBV

 c) HCV

 d) HDV



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., HBV�[Ref Ananthnarayan 9th/e p. 549 & 8thle p.
545]
748. Core antigen [HBO in HBV is encloded
     by which gene ?
 a) S

 b) C

 c) P

 d) X



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is `b' i.e., C [Ref Ananthanarayan 9th/e p. 544]
The genome of HBV is made of circular DNA, but it is unusual
because the DNA is not fully double stranded -> one of the strands
is incomplete and other is complete 4 partially double stranded DNA.
There are four known genes encoded by genome - 'C' , X', 'P' ,'S'.
P gene is the largest gene.. X-gene codes for HBx Ag, which can
transactivate the transcription of cellular and viral genes and may
contribute to carcinogenesis. HBx Ag and its antibody are present in
patients with severe chronic hepatitis and hepatocellular
carcinoma.
749. True about CMV are all except ?
 a) Most common cause of post-transpinatation infection

 b) Most common cause of transplacental infection

 c) A non-enveloped DNA virus

 d) Produces intranuclear inclusions



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., A non-enveloped DNA virus
CMV is an enveloped DNA virus, belongs to Herpesviridae.
750. Respiratory Syncytial Virus (RSV) causes
     all, EXCEPT:
 a) Coryza in kids

 b) ARDS

 c) Bronchitis

 d) Common cold



Correct Answer - B
RSV infection leads to a wide spectrum of respiratory illnesses.
In infants it can cause pneumonia, bronchiolitis, and
tracheobronchitis. In this age group, illness begins most frequently
with rhinorrhea, low-grade fever, often accompanied by cough and
wheezing.

In adults, the most common symptoms are common cold, with
rhinorrhea, sore throat, and cough. It cause severe pneumonia in
elderly.

Sinusitis, otitis media, and worsening of chronic obstructive and
reactive airway disease are also associated with RSV infection.

Ref: Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 18th Edition, Chapter
186
  751. Rota-teq oral vaccine for rotavirus
       contains ?
    a) 2 reassorted rotaviruses

    b) 3 reassorted rotaviruses

    c) 4 reassorted rotaviruses

    d) 5 reassorted rotaviruses



   Correct Answer - D
   Ans. is 'd' i.e., 5 reassorted rotaviruses [Ref Essential of medical
   microbiology p. 932] Rota-virus vaccine
   The Rotavirus vaccines are live -attenuated vaccines given orally.
   Two new vaccines are now in use -
1. RV5 oral pentavalent vaccine (Rota teq) contains five reassortant
   rotaviruses developed from 5 human strains on bovine rotavirus
   background [These five strains are GI, G2, G3, G4 and P (8)]
2. RV1 monovalent vaccine (Rotarix) contains one live attenuated
   rotavirus strain [the strain is P1 A (8) GI]
   The administration of Rotarix (2 doses) and Rota Teq (3 doses)
   needs to be completed by 32 weeks of age to minimize any potential
   risk of intussusception.
   The first licensed rotavirus vaccine, a Rhesus monkey rotavirus -
   based tetravalent human reassortant vaccine (Rotashield), was
   withdrawn after this live oral vaccine was associated with
   development of intestinal intussusception.
752. What is similar between rotavirus and
     Norwalk virus ?
 a) Both belong to same family

 b) Both have segmented genome

 c) Both have single stranded RNA

 d) Both are causes of viral gastroenteritis



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Both are causes of viral gastroenteritis [Ref
Essentials of Microbiology p. 497]
Rota virus belongs to reoviridae → double stranded segmented
RNA.
Norwalk virus belongs to calciviridae → Single stranded non
segmented RNA.
Both Rota virus and Norwalk virus are causes of viral gastroenteritis
753. Zika virus causes ?
 a) Hepatitis

 b) Myocarditis

 c) Conjunctivitis

 d) None of these



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Conjunctivitis
Zika virus (ZIKV) is a flavivirus related to yellow fever virus. It is
transmitted by Aedes mosquito.
Zika virus disease (Zika) is a disease caused by the Zika virus,
which is spread to people primarily through the bite of an infected
754. Ebola virus belongs to?
 a) Picornaviridae

 b) Togaviridae

 c) Flaviviridae

 d) Filoviridae



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Filoviridae
755. Polio virus is shed in stool upto-
 a) 6 weeks

 b) 8 weeks

 c) 10 weeks

 d) 12 weeks



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., 12 weeks
In the faces, the virus is excreted commonly for 2 to 3 weeks,
sometimes as long as 3 to 4 months.
  756. True about rhabdoviridae are all except ?
    a) Includes vesculostomatitis virus

    b) Rabies virus is inactivated by formalin

    c) Rabies virus is negative sense double stranded RNA virus

    d) All of the above correct



   Correct Answer - C
   Ans. is 'c' i.e., Rabies virus is negative sense double stranded
   RNA virus
   Rhabdoviridae contains two genera :?
1. Vesiculoviruses : Vesculostomatitis virus, chandipura virus.
2. Lyssavirus : Rabies virus.
   Rabies virus
   It is an eneveloped, RNA (negative sense ss RNA) virus.
   It has RNA dependent RNA polymerase.
   It is a bullet shaped virus.
   Rabies virus is sensitive to ethanol, iodine preparations, soap,
   quaternary ammonium compound, detergents and lipid solvents (like
   ether, chloroform). It is inactivated by phenol, beta-propiolactone
   (BPL), formalin, Sun light, UV irradiation, and by heat.
   Rabies is primarily a zoonotic disease of warm-blooded animals,
   particularly carnivorous such as dogs, Cats, Jackals and wolves.
   It is transmitted to man usually by bites or licks of rabid animals.
   It is the communicable disease which is always fatal.
   It is dead end infection in man.
757. Negri bodies are characteristic of:
     September 2008, March 2013
 a) Tetanus

 b) Rabies

 c) Polio

 d) AIDS



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B: Rabies
Since first described by Negri in 1903, the presence of the Negri
bodies are practically pathognomic for rabies and are an important
diagnostic finding.
Negri bodies are discrete, intracytoplasmic, deeply eosinophilic
inclusions that measure several microns in diameter. In about 75%
of cases of rabies these can be seen on hematoxylin and eosin
stained sections.
They occur in neurons of the brain stem, particularly those in the
hippocampus, and in the Purkinje cells of the cerebellum.
Ultrastructural studies have shown that Negri body consists of a
mass of nucleocapsids surrounded by viral particles budding from
intracytoplasmic membranes.
Those bodies can be seen in axons, and it is in this way that virus
spreads from the central nervous system to many organs of the
body.
Because Negri bodies are usually seen in intact neurons, they are
found away from the inflammatory, nonspecific lesions. Rabies viral
antigens can be demonstrated in infected cells by means of
fluorescent antibody technique.
Antigens can be shown to be present in cells in the absence of Negri
bodies, and hence this technique is much more sensitive than the
bodies, and hence this technique is much more sensitive than the
search of sections of brain for the pathognomonic cytoplasmic
inclusions.
758. CCR5 mutation is related to which
     condition ?
 a) Resistance to HIV infection

 b) Susceptibility to HIV infection

 c) Resistance to HBV infection

 d) Susceptibility to HBV infection



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Resistance to HIV infection [Ref
www.lumenlearning.com]
In recent years, scientific interest has been piqued by the discovery
of a few individuals from northern Europe who are resistant to HIV
infection in 1998, American geneticist Stephen J. O'Brien at the
National Institutes of Health (NIH) and colleagues published the
result of their genetic analysis of more than 4,000 individuals.
These indicated that many individuals of Eurasian descent (up to
14% in some ethnic groups) have a deletion mutation, called CCR5
delta 32, in the gene encoding CCR5 is a coreceptor found on the
surface of T cells that is necessary for many strains of the virus to
enter the host cell.
The mutation leads to the production of a receptor to which HIV
cannot effectively bind and thus blocks viral people homozygous for
this mutation have greatly reduced susceptibility to HIV infection,
and those who are heterozygous have some protection from
infection as well.
759. A 52-year-old male with HIV presents
     with profuse, watery diarrhea of 5 days’
     duration. A biopsy of the small intestine
     is shown here.What is the most likely
     cause of this patient’s symptoms?




 a) Cryptosporidium.

 b) Giardia.

 c) Acanthamoeba.

 d) Histoplasma.



Correct Answer - A
The causative organism in this case is cryptosporidium, a teeny
tiny protozoan.
Cryptosporidium mainly affects children, in whom it causes either
self-limited or persistent diarrhea. It also affects patients with AIDS,
in whom it causes severe, chronic diarrhea. The organism is highly
infectious, and is spread by fecal-oral transmission.
Diagnosis may be made on acid-fast examination of the stool, in
which cryptosporidial oocysts are visible as round, red-staining
structures. Histologic examination, which is usually not necessary for
diagnosis, shows tiny round organisms projecting from the
brush border, as seen in the photomicrograph above. Treatment
involves antiparasitic therapy and nutritional support.
760. Bloody diarrhea in HIV infected patient is
     mostly due to ?
 a) Cryptosporidium

 b) Isospora

 c) CMV

 d) Salmonella



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e.,CMV [Ref www.medscape.com]
The most common of the opportunistic infections that cause diarrhea
in patients with AIDS are CMV infection, cryptosporidiosis,
microsporidiosis, and MAC infection. CMV infection is the most
common opportunistic viral infection in the GI tract of HIV-infected
patients and can cause problems from the mouth to the anus. It
most frequently causes a colitis associated with fever, crampy
abdominal pain, and frequent (often bloody) stools.
  761. Sabouraud's dextrose [glucose] agar is
       used for isolation of -
    a) Pseudomonas

    b) B. Antracis

    c) Fungi

    d) Ancylostome



   Correct Answer - C
   Ans. is 'c' i.e.,Fungi [Ref Greenwood 10/e p. 570; Ananthanarayan
   8th/e p. 601]
   Culture media used in mycology are :
1. Sabouraud's glucose agar (most common)
2. Czapek - Dox medium
3. Corn meal agar
762. Neurotropic fungus is/are -
 a) Cryptococcus neoformans

 b) Histoplasmosis

 c) Trichophyton

 d) a and b



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Cryptococcus neoformans; 'b' i.e.,
Histoplasmosis
Fungi infecting the brain are
Cryptococcus neoformans
Blastomyces dermatitidis
Coccidioides immitis
Aspergillus sp.
Candida sp.
Sporothrix schenckii
Histoplasma capsulatum
763. Hair perforation test is positive in
     infection with ?
 a) Trichophyton

 b) Microsporum

 c) Epidermophyton

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Trichophyton
Hair perforation test
. The hair perforation test consists of inoculating colonies of an
organism into a dish containing a small amount of water, a few drops
of yeast extract solution and some human hair. The dish is
incubated at 300C and after 7 days, some of the hair are taken and
are kept on a slide with a coverslip and are observed under a
microscope. The test is considered positive if the hair has deep,
narrow wedge shaped perforation in it.
. Hair perforation test is done to distinguish between isolates of
dermatophytes, particularly trichophyton mentagrophytes and its
variants.
   764. Ectothrix is caused by ?
    a) T tansurans

    b) T violaceum

    c) Microsporum canis

    d) All of the above



   Correct Answer - C
   Ans. is 'c' i.e., Microsporum canis [Ref: Greenwood 16thie p. 574]
   Tinea capitis is dermatophytic infection of scalp and scalp hair.
   Occurs commonly in children. It is uncommon in adults (in contrast,
   T.crusis, T.manuum and T.unguium are common in adults). Caused
   by genera trichophyton or microsporum. As epidermophyton does
   not affect the hair, Epidermophyton does not cause T.capitis. Two
   most common species causing T-Capitis are M.canis & T.
   tonsurans. Tinea capitis may be two types.
1. Endothrix Invasion of hair shaft by fungus. It is caused by
   T.tonsurans (MC), T.violaceum, T.schoenleinii.
2. Ectothrix Fungal invasion is restricted to the outer most cuticle of
   hair. It is caused by M.canis (MC), M.audouini, T.mentagrophytes.
   As ectothrix is the commonest type of T.capitis, Microsporum canis
   is the most common cause of T.Capitis
765. Aspergillus fumigatus is differentiated by
     other fungi by ?
 a) Showing septate hyphae

 b) Grow at 45°C

 c) Cause respiratory tract infection

 d) Most common endemic mycosis



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Grow at 45°C [Ref Harrison 19thie p. 1346;
Ananthanarayan 8th/e p. 613]
Aspergillus is a mould with septate branching hyphae.
Ability of A. fumigatus to grow at 45° C helps to distinguish it from
other species.
Mode of transmission - Inhalation of Aspergillus spores (Conidia)
into lungs.
The commonest human disease caused by aspergillus is
otomycosis.
Aspergillus infection in neutropenic patient is characterized by
hyphal invasion of blood vessels, thrombosis, necrosis and
hemorrhagic infarction
766. Chlamydospore is formed by ?
 a) Candida albicans

 b) Candida pscitasi

 c) Histoplasma

 d) Cryptococcus



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e.,Candida albicans [Ref Ananthanarayan 8thle p. 607-
608]
All candida species pathogenic for humans are also encountered as
commensals of humans, particularly in the mouth, stool and vagina.
They grow rapidly on simple media as oval budding cells at 25° to
37°C.
In tissue, both yeasts and pseudohyphae are present.
Candida albicans is differentiated by other candida :
It forms true hyphae (mycelia) or germ tubes when grown in serum.
It forms thick walled large spores called chlamydospores when
grown in corn meal agar.
It is dimorphic.
767. True about cryptococcus are all except
 a) Primarily infects lung

 b) Urease negative

 c) India-ink is used

 d) All are true



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is `b i.e., Urease negative
CRYPTOCOCCUS NEOFORMANS
The only pathogenic yeast
Four capsular serotypes - A, B, C and D
It has polysaccharide capsule
Most infections in immunocompromized patients are caused by
serotype A.
Pigeon droppings commonly contains serotype A and D.
Eucalyptus tree contain serotype B.
It is urease positive.
Mode of transmission
By inhalation of the fungus into the lung (most common)
Through skin or mucosa (some times).
768. Pneumocystis jerovici is:
 a) Associated with CMV

 b) Diagnosis is by sputum microscopy

 c) Seen only in immunocompromised patients

 d) Always associated with pneumatocele



Correct Answer - B
Answer: B. Diagnosis is by sputum microscopy
Human isolate of. Pneumocystis which is associated with severe
pneumonia in immunocompromised state particularly AIDS.
P. jerovici is an extracellular pathogen. Growth in the lung is
limited to surfactant layer above alveolar epithelium.
Serologic evidence suggest that most individuals are infected in
early childhood (thus option “c” is wrong) but the pneumonia is
seen only in immunocompromised state.
Diagnosis is made by detection of organism in proper specimen
Sputum: Quick and non invasive.
Broncho-alaeolar laoage (BAL) fluid: Mainstay of pneumocystis
diagnosis.
Transbronchial biopsy: If diagnosis cannot be made by BAL.
769. Pneumocystis carinii is diagnosed by -
 a) Sputum examination for trophozoites and cyst under
    microscope

 b) Culture

 c) Positive serology

 d) Growth on artificial media



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Sputum examination for trophozoites and cyst under
microscope
770. A 60 years old farmer has developed
     swelling on the sole of foot with
     discharging yellow granules. The
     diagnosis is -
 a) Fungal mycetoma

 b) Eumycetoma

 c) Actinomycosis

 d) Candidiasis



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Actinomycosis
Mycetoma
Is a localized chronic granulomatous involvement of the
subcutaneous and deeper tissues, commonly affecting the foot and
less often the hand and other parts.
Presenting as a subcutaneous swelling with multiple discharging
sinuses.
Sinuses discharge seropurulent fluid containing granules.
These granules are microcolonies of the etiological agents.
Mycetoma can be caused by both fungus and bacteria
771. Lipophilic fungus is ?
 a) Malassezia furfur

 b) Candida

 c) Cryptococcus

 d) Histoplasma



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Malassezia furfur [Ref Principles of medical
microbiology p. 781]
Malassezia furfur (Pityrosporum ovale) is a lipopphilic fungus that is
found in areas of the body that are rich in sebaceous glands.
This fungus causes tinea versicolor (pityriasis versicolor).
772. Not true about sporothrix Schenckii ?
 a) Dimorphic fungus

 b) Asteroid bodies

 c) Copper penny bodies

 d) Common in gardners



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e.,Copper penny bodies [Ref Harrison 19th/e p. 1353]
Copper penny bodies are seen in chromoblastomycosis.
Sporothrix Schenckii
Sporothrix Schenckii is a dimorphic fungus.
The organism (sporothrix schenckii) are usually described as tiny,
cigar-shaped bodies, 3-5 microns in length, which bear from one to
three small oval buds at either or both pales.
Occasionally a larger asteroid body may be seen.
Because S. schenckii naturally found in soil, hay, sphagnum moss,
and plants, it usually affects farmers, gardeners, and agricultural
workers.
This fungal disease usually affects the skin although rare forms can
affect the lungs, joints, bones and CNS.
Fungus enters through small cuts and abrasions in the skin to cause
the infection.
Because roses can spread the disease, it is one of a few diseases
referred to as rose-thorn or rose gardener's disease.
773. Antibody specificity is due to ?
 a) Amino acid sequence at H chain

 b) Amino acid sequence at L chain

 c) Amino acid at carboxy terminal

 d) Amino acid sequence at the amino terminal



Correct Answer - A:B:D
Ans. is 'd > a & b' i.e., Amino acid sequence at amino terminal >
Amino acid sequence at H chain & Amino acid sequence at L
chain [Ref Read below]
Antibody specificity is due to variability of the aminoacid sequences
at the variable unit (at aminoterminal) of both H and L chains (not
only H or L chains).
774. Antibody diversity is due to -
 a) Gene rearrangement

 b) Gene translocation

 c) Antigenic variation

 d) a and c



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Gene rearrangement; 'c' i.e., Antigenic variation
775. Specificity of antibody is dependent on ?
 a) Fc portion

 b) Fab region

 c) Carboxy terminal

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Fab region [Ref: Harrison 19th/e p. 372;
Ananthanarayan 9thie p. 100]
The infinite range of the antibody specificity of immunoglobulins
depends on the variability of the aminoacid sequences at the
variable units of H and L chains.
Variable region is present on Fab region.
   776. Most effective antibody for precipitation
        ?
    a) IgM

    b) IgG

    c) IgA

    d) IgD



   Correct Answer - B
   Ans. is 'b' i.e., IgG [Ref Harrison 19th/e p. 372 & 18th/e p. 2674;
   Ananthanarayan 9thie p. 98 & 8th/e p. 98]
   IgM is more effective than IgG for:
1. Immune hemolysis
2. Opsonization
3. Complement fixation by classical pathway
4. Bacterial agglutination
   IgG is more effective than IgM for:
1. Neutralization of toxins & viruses
2. Precipitation reactions.
777. Complement Fixation test is:
     September 2005
 a) VIDAL

 b) Coombs test

 c) Wassermann reaction

 d) VDRL



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C: Wassermann reaction
The complement fixation test (CFT) was extensively used in syphilis
serology after being introduced by Wasserman in 1906. However,
there is now a trend to replace the CFT with the simple flocculation
tests.
Although CFT is considered to be a relatively simple test, it is a very
exacting procedure because 5 variables are involved. In essence the
test consists of two antigen-antibody reactions, one of which is the
indicator system.
The first reaction, between a known virus antigen and a specific
antibody takes place in the presence of a predetermined amount of
complement. The complement is removed or "fixed" by the antigen-
antibody complex.
The second antigen-antibody reaction consists of reacting sheep
RBC with haemolysin. When this indicator system is added to the
reactants, the sensitized RBCs will only lyse in the presence of free
complement. The antigens used for CFT tend to be group antigens
rather than type-specific antigens. In order for the CFT to be set up
correctly, the optimal concentration of haemolytic serum,
complement, and antigen should be determined by titration.
The Wassermann test is no longer in use.
778. A patient is presenting with recurrent
     staphylococcal infection, kyphoscoliosis
     and typical faces. The patient is suffering
     from ?
 a) Ig A deficiency

 b) Hyper IgE syndrome

 c) Common variable immunodeficiency

 d) Burton's Agammaglobulinemia



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Hyper IgE syndrome Job's syndrome (Hyper-IgE
syndrome)
Job's syndrome, also called Hyper-IgE syndrome or
Hyperimmunoglobulin E syndrome, is an autosomal dominant
disorder due to mutations in Signal Transducer and Activator of
Transcription-3 (STAT-3).
There is defect in phagocytosis. IgE levels are elevated. Other
immunoglobulins are normal.
Clinical manifestations include staphylococcal cold abscess, otitis
media, recurrent sinopulmonary and skin infections, and cavitary
pneumonia with pneumatoceles.
Beside infections, other findings are characteristic facies with brood
nose, osteoporosis, kyphoscoliosis, cerebral.
779. 18 years old girl presents with watery
     diarrhea. Most likely causative agent -
 a) Rota virus

 b) V. cholerae

 c) Salmonella

 d) Shigella



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., V. cholerae
Amongst the given options Rotavirus and V. cholerae cause watery
diarrhea.
Acute watery diarrha in children is usually bacterial in origin, most
commonly due to enterotoxigenic E. coli (ETEC). V cholerae is also
a common cause.
Rota virus is the most common cause of diarrhea in infant and
children (the patient in question is adult).
780. Swimming pool conjunctivitis is caused
     by
 a) Chlamydia trachomatis

 b) Adenovirus type 8

 c) Adenovirus type 8

 d) Gonococcus



Correct Answer - A
Ans., Chlamydia trachomatis
781. A 30 years old male is having prpductive
     cough with dysnea. Blood gas analysis
     shows low pa02. Chest x-ray is showing
     reticulonodular pattern. The causative
     agent is?
 a) Staph aureus

 b) Pneumococcus

 c) P. jerovecii

 d) Pseudomonas



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., P. jerovecii [Ref Read below]
Reticulo-nodular shadow is seen in interstitial pneumonia.
Among the given options P jerovecii is a cause of interstitial
pneumonia.
Other three options are causes of airspace pneumonia.
"Pneumocystis Carinii pneumonia produces a diffuse, symmetric,
fine-to-medium reticulonodular pattern".
782. Most common organism grown in urine
     culture of pregnant woman with
     asymptomatic bacteriuria?
 a) Proteus

 b) E. coli

 c) Staph aureus

 d) Pseudomonas



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., E. coli
Asymptomatic bacteriuria is the presence of bacteria in a voided
urine sample and is caused by bacterial colonization of the urinary
tract. It affects about 5 to 10 percent of both sexually active and
pregnant women. Asymptomatic bacteriuria is less prevalent in men.
As the name indicates, asymptomatic bacteriuria does not cause
symptoms. The condition simply refers to the detection of bacteria in
a urine sample. Nonetheless, there is good reason to be concerned
about this infection, particularly if you are pregnant, because it can
lead to a symptomatic upper urinary tract infection (namely,
pyelonephritis), which can complicate pregnancy.
Bacteria are typically introduced into the urinary tract during
intercourse or when wiping after a bowel movement. The bacterium
E. coli is responsible for at least 75 to 80 percent of asymptomatic
bacteriuria. Klebsiella pneumoniea, Proteus species, staphylococcal
species, enterococci, and group B streptococci can also establish
colonization.
783.
A paitent operated for transurethral resection
of prostate [TURP] develops UTI. The
organism most commonly grown on culture
will be -
 a) Proteus

 b) E. coli

 c) Pseudomonas

 d) Listeria



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., E. coli [Ref www.jcam.com]
Most common organism causing UTI after transurethral prostectomy
is E coli.
784. Cellulitis surrounding diabetic ulcer is
     mostly caused by ?
 a) Streptococcus pyogenes

 b) Staphylococcus

 c) Mixed organisms

 d) Pseudomonas



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Mixed organisms [Ref Essentials of medical
microbilogy p. 712]
"A mixture of gram-positive cocci and gram-negative acrobes and
anaerobes is often implicated in cellulitis surrounding diabetic and
decubitus ulcers".
785. Candidias of penis is ?
 a) Thrush

 b) Leukoplakia

 c) Balanitis

 d) None



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e.,Balanitis [Ref Essentials of medical
microbiology p. 712]
Candidal infections are identified by their location on the body as
follows :
Axillae, under pendulous breasts, groin, intergluteal folds : intertrigo.
Glans penis : balanitis
Follicular pustules : candidal folliculitis
Nail folds : candidal paronychia
Mouth and tongue : oral cnadidiasis (thrush)
Area included under diaper -diaper dermatitis
786. Non-parasitic eosinophilia is caused by
     infection with -
 a) Staphylococcus

 b) Ehrlischia

 c) Coccidioidomycosis

 d) Candidiasis



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e.,Coccidioidomycosis [Ref Diagnostic hematology p.
332]
"One of the very few non-parasitic infections that regularly cause
eosinophilia is Coccidioidomycosis, a fungal infection.
atypical pneumonia
787. Atypical pneumonia can be caused by
     the following microbial agents except?
a) Mycoplasma pneumoniae.

b) Legionella pemmophila

c) Human Corona virus

d) Klebsiella pneumoniae



Correct Answer - D
Answer is D (Kleibsella pneumonia) :
Causes of Atypical pneumonias .
1. Mycoplasma pneumonias
2. Viral pneumonias - Influenza
- RSV
- Adenovirus
- Rhinovirus
- Rubeola
- Varicilla
- Corona virus
3. Chlamydia pneumonia
4. Coxiella bumetti
5. Pneumocystis carinii
6. Legionella
Corona virus is an infrequent cause of pneumonia.
SARS associated corona virus (SARS - CoV) caused epidemic of
pneumonia from Nov 2002 to July 2003 - Harrison
788. Health index characteristics are all
     except ?
 a) Validity

 b) Reliability

 c) Affordability

 d) Feasibility



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Affordability
There has been some confusion over terminology: health indicator
as compared to health index (plural: indices or indexes).
It has been suggested that in relation to health trends, the term
indicator is to be preferred to index, whereas health index is
generally considered to be an amalgamation of health indicators
(56).
Characteristics of indicators
Indicators have been given scientific respectability: for example ideal
indicators.
Should be valid, i.e., they should actually measure what they are
supposed to measure;
Should be reliable and objective, i.e., the answers should be the
same if measured by different people in similar circumstances.
Should be sensitive, i.e., they should be sensitive to changes in the
situation concerned.
Should be specific, i.e., they should reflect changes only in the
situation concerned,
Should be feasible, i.e., they should have the ability to obtain data
needed, and;
Should be relevant, i.e., they should contribute to the understanding
of the phenomenon of interest.
   789. True for epidemiological triad
    a) Time, place, person

    b) Agent, host, environment

    c) Disease, prevention, treatment

    d) Agent, man, disease



   Correct Answer - B
   Ans: B i.e. Agent, host, environment
   Epidemiological triad
   The occurrence and manifestations of any disease, whether
   communicable or noncommunicable, are determined by the
   interaction of the following three factors.
1. The agent
2. The host
3. The environment
   These three factors together constitute the epidemiological triad.
   Mere presence of these factors does not cause disease, the
   interaction of these three is required for the causation of a disease.
790. PQLI is
 a) Objective component of level of living

 b) Subjective component of level of living

 c) Objective component of quality of life

 d) Subjective component of quality of life



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Subjective component of quality of life
Subjective component
The subjective component of well being is quality of life.
The level of living and standard of living are objective criteria of well
being, while the quality of life comprises the individual's subjective
evaluation of these.
The recent definition of quality of life is as follows "a composite
measure of physical mental and social well being as perceived by
each individual or group of individuals."
WHO definition is as follows "the condition of life resulting from the
combination of the effects of the complete range of factors such as
those determining health, happiness, education, etc."
The index for quality of life is "Physical quality of life index (PQLI)".
The PQLI is an attempt to measure the quality of life or well-being of
a country.
Physical quality of life index consolidates three indicators:-
Literacy rate
Infant mortality rate
Life expectancy at age 1 year (LEI)
PQLI ranges from 0 to 100.
PQLI in India is 65.
791. Only disease which is eradicated
     worldwide ?
 a) Small pox

 b) Polio

 c) Diphtheria

 d) Measles



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Small pox
Eradication implies termination of all transmission of infection by
extermination of infectious agent.
It is an absolute process, i.e. all or none phenomenon.
It literally means "tearing out by roots".
Eradication is a "global term" used only cessation of infection from
the whole world.
Smallpox is the only disease that has been eradicated.
Other diseases which are candidates for global eradication Polio,
measles, dracunculiasis, diphtheria.
792. Endemic disease is defined as -
 a) Disease occuring regularly in expected frequency

 b) Disease occuring irregularly

 c) Disease occuring in excess of expected freqency

 d) Disease affecting a large population



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Disease occuring regularly in expected
frequency [Ref Park 23"/e p. 93 & 22"/e p. 89]
Sporadic → Disease occuring irregularly from time to time.
Endemic → Disease occuring regularly in expected frequency.
Epidemic → Disease occuring in excess of expected frequency.
Pandemic → Epidemic affecting a large proportion of population
over a wide geographic area.
793. Median incubation period is ?
 a) Maximum time from exposure to development of symptoms in
    all cases

 b) Minimum time from exposure to development of symptoms in all
    cases

 c) Time from exposure to development in 50% of cases

 d) None of the above



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Time from exposure to development in 50% of
cases
Incubation period is the time interval between invasion by an
infectious agent and appearnace of the first sign and symptom.
'Median incubation period' is the time required for 50% cases to
occur following exposure.
794. Standpipe in rural oreas is an example of
     which principle of primary health care?
 a) Equitable distribution

 b) Community porticipation

 c) Intersectoral coordination

 d) Appropriate technology



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Inter-sectoral coordination [Ref Primary heath
care online; Park 23'/e p. 742]
Public works, eg. ensuring an adequate supply of safe water (Stand
pipe) and basic sanitation, comes under inter-sectoral coordination
(multi-sectoral approach).
Intersectoral coordination
The primary health care is not provided by health sector alone.
It involves all other related sectors of national and community
development, in particular agriculture, animal husbandry, food,
industry, education, housing, public works (e.g. an adequate supply
of safe water and basic sanitation), communication and other
sectors.
795. Secondary attack rate is a measure of-
a) Communicability

b) Lethality

c) Strength of association

d) None



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Communicability
SAR is an important measure of communicability.
Higher secondary attack rate means, more numbers of susceptible
contacts are developing the disease after exposure to primary case.
So, higher the SAR higher is the communicability (infectiousness) of
disease.
One term related to secondary attack rate is attack rate and requires
specific mention here (Has been explained in brief previously)
Attack Rate:
When new cases occur rapidly over a short period of time in a well
defined population the attack rate is used. o It is usually expressed
as a percentage.
                         new cases occuring during a short period of
time
Attack Rate =
________________________________________________________________x
100
                      population at risk at the beginning of the time
perion
The attack rate is also called cumulative incidence rate. It differs
from the conventional incidence rate in that it tends to describe
disease or events that affect a larger proportion of the population of
interest.
interest.
Attack rate is used when "population is exposed to riskfor a limited
period of time, Such as epidemic." Attack rate effects the extent of
epidemic.
Attack rate vs secondary attack rate
Attack rate includes new cases during a specific period of time
(which is usually short) and it includes all the cases during that
period, i.e. primary as well as secondary cases.
On the other hand secondary attack rate includes new cases which
develop within the range of incubation period after exposure to
primary case, i.e. it includes only secondary case (not primary
cases).
796. A population of 50 children is having 10
     immunized against chickenpox. 5
     children developed chickenpox on march
     2017. Other 28 children developed
     chickenpox within next 2 week what is
     the SAR of chickenpox?
 a) 60%

 b) 70%

 c) 80%

 d) 90%



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., 80% [Ref: Park Mlle p. 105-107 & 23ra/e p.100]
Primary cases in the question → 5 (developing chickenpox on same
day)
Immune children → 10
Susceptible contacts → Total children - (Primary cases + immunized
children) = 50 - ( 5+10) = 35
No. of susceptible developing desease = 28
No of susceptible developing disease x 100 = 80%
Total number of susceptiblesx
797. Denominator in under -5 proportional
     mortality rate?
 a) Number of death under 5 years of age

 b) Mid-year under - 5 population

 c) Total deaths

 d) Mid- year population



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Total deaths
798. Berkesonian bias is a type of ?
 a) Admission rate bias

 b) Interviever bias

 c) Information bias

 d) Recall bias



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Admission rate bias [Ref: Park 24thle p. 78-79]
Berkesonian bias
Berksonian bias results from the greater probability of hospital
admission for people with two or more disease than for people with
one disease. So, it is also known as admission rate bias.
799. True about iceberg of disease ?
 a) Clinician is concerned with hidden portion of iceberg

 b) Tip of the iceberg represent clinical cases

 c) Tetanus is classical example

 d) Screening is done for Tip of the iceberg



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Tip of the iceberg represent clinical cases
Iceberg of disease
* Disease in a community may be compared with an iceberg.
* The floating tip of the iceberg represents what the physician sees
in the community, i.e. clinical cases (Diagnosed case, symptomatic
case of the clinically apparent case).
* The vast submerged portion of the iceberg represents the hidden
mass of disease, i.e. latent, inapparent, presymptomatic and
undiagnosed cases and carriers in the community.
  - The "waterline" represents the demarcation between apparent
and inapparent disease.
  - An epidemiologist is concerned with the hidden portion of the
iceberg whereas the clinician is concerned with the tip of the
iceberg.
  - Screening is done for a Hidden portion of the iceberg whereas
diagnosis is done for the tip of the iceberg.
* The iceberg phenomenon of disease is not shown by Rabies,
Tetanus, Rubella, and Measles.
* The clinician concerned only with the tip of iceberg, i.e
symptomatic cases that are seen in clinical treatment, this can result
in inaccurate view of the nature and causes of a disease results
because the minority of the cases are studied (hidden cases:-
submerged portion of iceberg is not studied) --> Clinician's Fallacy.
800. Live influenza vaccine is given by which
     route ?
 a) Intradermal

 b) Subcutaneous

 c) Intramuscular

 d) Intra nasal



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Intranasal [Ref Park 24thie p. 168]
The routes of important vaccines are :?
Subcutaneous : Measles, rubella, killed influenza, killed cholera,
IPV, yellow fever.
Intramuscular : Mumps, killed influenza, typhoid Vi-polysaccharide,
DPT (deep intramuscular), rabies, IPV. iii)Intradermal : BCG, rabies.
Nasal : Live influenza.
Oral : OPV, oral cholera, oral typhoid (typhoral).
801. Which of the following is true ?
 a) Two live vaccines should not be given together

 b) Live and killed vaccine should not be given together

 c) Immunoglobolin should not be given for at least 6 weeks when
    a live vaccine is administered

 d) Live vaccine should not be given for 12 weeks if immunoglobin
    has been given



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Live vaccine should not be given for 12 weeks if
immunoglobin has been given.
Two live vaccines can be given simultaneously, but they should be
given at different sites. Otherwise they should be given at an interval
of at least 3 weeks (if administered at same site).
Live and killed vaccine can be given together.
Live vaccines should not normally be given for 12 weeks after an
injection of normal human Ig and if a live vaccine has already been
given, Human Ig injection should be deferred for 2 weeks.
802. HALE is used to measure
 a) Disability adjusted life expectancy

 b) Healthy life expectancy

 c) Quality adjusted life expectancy

 d) Expectancy free of disability



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Healthy life expectancy
Health-Adjusted life expectancy (HALE)
HALE is the indicator used to measure a healthy life expectancy.
HALE is based on the life expectancy at birth but includes an
adjustment for time spent in poor health.
It is the equivalent number of years in full health that a newborn can
expect to live based on current rates of ill health and mortality.
   803. During investigation of an epidemic, the
        area is declared free of epidemic when?
    a) Twice the incubation period of the disease since occurrence of
       the last case

    b) Thrice the incubation period of the disease since occurrence of
       the last case

    c) The longest incubation period for the disease

    d) Incubation period for the disease plus two standard deviations



   Correct Answer - A
   Ans. is 'a' i.e., Twice the incubation period of the disease since
   occurrence of the last case [Ref Park 22"d /e p. 123]
   There are following steps in the investigation of an epidemic :?
1. Verification of diagnosis : This is the first step in investigation of an
   epidemic.
2. Confirmation of existence of an epidemic : By comparing with
   disease frequencies during same period in previous years.
3. Defining the population at risk.
4. Rapid search for all cases and their characteristics : Search for new
   cases is carried out everyday, till the area is declared free of
   epidemic; this period is usually taken as "twice the incubation period
   of the disease since the occurance of last case".
5. Data analysis.
6. Formulation of hypothesis.
804. Specific content in malaria vaccine is?
 a) Gametocytic protein

 b) Polysaccharide sheath

 c) Sporozoite protein

 d) Lipoprotein envelop



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Sporozoite protein [Ref Internet]
Circumsporozoite protein (CSP) is a secreted protein of the
sporozoite stage of the malaria parasite (plasmodium sp) and the
antigenic target of RTS,S, a pre-erythrocytic malaria vaccine
currently undergoing clinical trails. The amino- acid sequence of
CSP consists of an immunodominant central repeat region flanked
by conserved motifs at the N-and C-termini that are implicated in
protein processing as the parasite travels from the mosquito to the
mammalian vector.
The structure and function of CSP is highly conserved across the
various strains of malaria that infect humans non-human primates
and rodents.
 It can first be detected in large quantities as sporozoites are forming
within oocysts residing the midgut walls of infected mosquitoes Upon
egression from mature oocysts, sporozoits begin migrating to the
salivary glands, and CSP is known to be an important mediator of
this process. Additionally CSP is involved in hepatocyte binding in
the mammalian host.
Here the N-terminus and central repeat region initially facilate
parasite binding. Once the hepatocyte surface proteolytic cleavage
at region 1 of the N-terminus exposes the adhesive domian of the C-
terminus, thereby priming the parasites for invasion of the liver.
805. Role of magnesium [Mg] in OPV?
 a) Adjuvant

 b) Preservative

 c) Stabilizar

 d) Antiinfective



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Stabilizer [Ref www.who.int]
"Polio Sabin (oral) vaccine is a magnesium chloride stabilized
preparation of live attenuated polio viruses of sabin strains type 1, 2,
er 3" Stabilizers
These are used to confirm product quality or stability. Examples are
potassium or sodium salts, lactose, human serum albumin, gelatin
and bovine serum albumin
806. The difference between descriptive and
     analytic studies?
 a) Descriptive studies are used to test hypothesis

 b) Analytic studies are used to formulate a hypothesis

 c) Descriptive studies are first phase in epidemiology

 d) Analytic studies observe distribution of disease



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Descriptive studies are first phase in
epidemiology [Ref Park 24thie p. 67-75]
Descriptive studies are first phase of an epidemiological
investigation. These studies are concerned with observing the
distrubution of disease in time, place and person. Descriptive studies
are used to formulate eitological hypothesis.
Analytical studies are the second major type of epidemiological
studies (after descriptive studies). It contrast to descriptive studies
that look at entire population, in analytic studies, the subject of
interest is the individual within the population (except in ecological
study). The object is not to formulate, but to test hypothesis.
In experimental studies, epidemiologist actively intervene to change
a disease determinant or progression of disease. Experimental
studies are used for testing hypothesis.
807. Strength of association of outcome and
     risk factor is measured by?
 a) Relative risk

 b) Attributable risk

 c) Population attributable risk

 d) None of the above



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Relative risk [Ref: Park 24`Ve p. 83]
Relative risk is a direct measure of the strength of association
between suspected cause and effect. For example a relative risk of
2 means that the incidence rate is 2 times higher in the exposed
group as compared with unexposed -> i.e., a 100% increase in risk.
On the other hand, attributable risk indicates the extent which is
attributed by risk factor (exposure) to disease. For example
attributable risk of 90% means 90 percent of disease among
exposed is due to exposure to risk factor.
In simple words :?
Relative risk indicates the increased percentage of risk of developing
a disease, if person is exposed to risk factor.
Attributable risk indicates the percentage of disease which is
attributed by risk factor among the exposed.
Relative risk is a better index than is attributable risk for assessing
the etiological role of a factor in disease.
808. Important measure for National health
     policy?
 a) Relative risk

 b) Odds ratio

 c) Incidence

 d) Attributable risk



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e.,Attributable risk [Ref Park 24th/e p. 83]
Relative risk Vs Attributable risk
Relative risk is a direct measure of the strength of association
between suspected cause and effect. For example a relative risk of
2 means that the incidence rate is 2 times higher in the exposed
group as compared with unexposed - i.e., a 100% increase in risk.
On the other hand, attributable risk indicates the extent which is
attributed by risk factor (exposure) to disease. For example
attributable risk of 90% means 90 percent of disease among
exposed is due to exposure to risk factor.
In simple words :-
Relative risk indicates the increased percentage of risk of developing
a disease, if person is exposed to risk factor.
Attributable risk indicates the percentage of disease which is
attributed by risk factor among the exposed.
Relative risk is a better index than is attributable risk for assessing
the etiological role of a factor in disease.
On the other hand, attributable risk gives a better idea than does
relative risk of the impact of successful preventive or public health
programme might have in reducing the problem. That means
attributable risk reflect the public health importance better than
relative risk.
809. A study that gives the prevalence of
     delusion in the elderly at a given point of
     time?
 a) Case-control study

 b) Cohort study

 c) Cross-sectional study

 d) Ecological study



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Cross-sectional study
Cross-sectional studies
A cross-sectional study is the simplest form of an observational
study.
It is also known as a prevalence study.
It is based on a single examination of a cross-section of the
population at one point of time.
The results of this examination can be projected on the whole
population.
The cross-sectional study tells about the distribution of a disease
rather than its etiology.
Cross-sectional studies can be thought of as providing a snapshot of
the frequency and characteristic of a disease in a population at a
particular point in time.
A cross-sectional study is more useful for chronic disease, as the
population is studied at once, no follow-up is required.
810. 100 individuals are diagnosed with lung
     cancer in a population of 100000. Out of
     100 patients, 80 were smokers and 20000
     were smokers in totals population. What
     is PAR?
 a) 60

 b) 75

 c) 80

 d) 90



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., 75 [Ref Park 241th le p. 83]
In the given question :
Incidence in total population = 100 per 1 lac
Number of exposed = 20000 ( All exposed)
Number of non-exposed = 80000 (100000 - 20000)
Non-exposed having lung cancer=20 (out of 100 patients 80 were
smoker. Thus 20 are noneexposed)
Incidence among non-exposed = 20 per 80000 or 25 per 100000
811.        Recall bias is most commonly
         associated with which study design -
 a) Case control study

 b) Cohort study

 c) Cohort case control study

 d) Cross-sectional study



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Case control Study
Recall bias (Memory bias) :
This type of bias may occur when cases and controls are asked to
recall certain events, and subjects in one group are more likely to
remember the event than those in the other group.
For example people take aspirin commonly and for many reasons,
but patients diagnosed as having peptic ulcer disease may recall the
ingestion of aspirin in greater accuracy than those without G1
problems. Also patients who have had an MI are more likely to recall
and remember certain habits (like eating habit) with greater accuracy
than those who have not had an MI.
812. True about standardization are all
     except?
 a) Most commonly used for age differences

 b) Direct standardization is used when population is large

 c) Age specific rates are required in indirect standardization

 d) All are correct



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Age specific rates are required in indirect
standardization [Ref: Park 23"/e p. 58]
Indirect standardization
When the population is small (or outcome is rare) the number of
events observed can be small.
In that circumstance, indirect standardized methods can be used to
produce a standardized mortality rate (SMR) or a standardized
incidence rate (SIR).
In indirect standardization, one computes the number of events
(mortality) that would have been expected if the event rates
(mortality rate) from the standard population had applied in the study
population, i.e. age specific rates of standard population are applied
to study population (opposite to direct standardization).
Study population is used to provide age specific death rates.
Within each age stratum, one multiplies the age specific rate of
standard population by the number of people in the study population
to determine the number of cases that would have expected if that
were the rate in the study group
These expected numbers are added up across all age groups and
divided into the observed number to yield the SMR.
Advantage of indirect standardization is that age specific rates of
study population are not required.
813. Standardization is most important for?
 a) Sex distribution

 b) Age distribution

 c) Disease distribution

 d) None of the above



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Age distribution [Ref Park 23rale p. 58]
Standardization is most commonly used for age.
A standardizated death rate (ASDR) is the best mortality indicator.
'Crude death rate' is to be standardized for age for comparison of
two population, as age composition is different.
814. Standardized death rates are used
     because health?
 a) For valid comparisom of two groups of different health
    determinants

 b) Calculations are more accurate

 c) To avoid selection bias

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., For valid comparison of two groups of different
health determinants [Ref Park 23rd /e p. 58]
Standardization (or adjustment) of rates is used to unable the valid
comparison of groups that differ regarding an important health
determinant (most commonly age). For example, if we want to
compare the death rates of two different populations with different
age composition, the crude death rate is not right yardstick because
rates are only comparable if the populations upon which they are
based are comparable.
815. True about cohort study
 a) Descriptive study

 b) Incidence study

 c) Proceeds from effect to cause

 d) All are correct



Correct Answer - B
A cohort study is a type of analytic observational study
Cohort study proceeds forward from cause to effect, i.e., the disease
has not occurred in subjects (In contrast to case-control study which
proceeds backward from effect to cause).
It is also known as Prospective study, longitudinal study, Incidence
study, forward-looking study.
The features of cohort studies are :
The cohorts are identified before the appearance of the disease
under investigation.
The study groups, so defined, are observed over some time to
determine the frequency of disease among them.
The study proceeds forward from cause to effect.
816. All are true about natural experiments,
     except?
 a) Researcher has no control over the allocation of subjects

 b) James lind experiment is an example

 c) Includes Randomized controlled trials [RCTs]

 d) All are correct



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Includes Randomized controlled trials
[RCTs] [Ref Modern epidemiology p. 397]
Natural experiments are those in which exposure to the event or
intervention of interest has not been manipulated by researcher. The
individuals exposed to the experimental and control conditions are
determined by nature or by other factors outside the control of the
investigators.
When a naturally occurring event or situation is exploited by a
researcher to help answer a research question, it is called a natural
experiment. The researcher has little or no control over the situation
that is being observed.
A good example of natural experiment is one by James Lind in 1747
on the prevention of scurvy among sailors. He compared the effects
of different acidic substances, ranging from vinegar to cidr, on grups
of afflicted sailors, and found that the group who from vinegar to cidr,
on groups of afflicted sailors, and found that the group who were
given oranges and lemons had largely recovered from scurvy after 6
days.
Other important example is John Snow's natural experiment on
cholera linked with contaminated water.
RCT is not natural experiment as researcher allocate the individuals
in study and control group by randomization.
in study and control group by randomization.
817. In a study a patient does not know the
     nature of drug [whether a placebo or
     curative drug] he is taking. The
     researcher knows the drug type to be
     given to the individuals in study. Types
     of blinding in this study is ?
 a) Single

 b) Double

 c) Triple

 d) Combined double /triple



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Single [Ref Park 24'1* p. 78]
Single            Study subjects are not aware of
blinding          the treatment they are receiving
                  Study subjects as well as
Double            investigator are not aware of the
blinding          treatment study subjects are
Triple blinding receiving
                  Study subjects, investigator as
                  well as analyzer are not aware of
                  the treatmc study subjects are
                  receiving
818. Which
     milk?
           Passive immunity is also provided through colostrum and breast



 a) IgG

 b) IgA

 c) IgE

 d) IgM



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. IgA
Passive immunity is also provided through colostrum and breast
milk, which contain IgA antibodies that are transferred to the gut
of the infant, providing local protection against disease-
causing bacteria and viruses until the newborn can synthesize its
own antibodies. Protection mediated by IgA is dependent on the
length of time that an infant is breastfed, which is one of the reasons
the World Health Organization recommends breastfeeding for at
least the first two years of life.
819. Mid year population is estimated on ?
 a) 1st March

 b) 1st July

 c) 1st April

 d) 15th August



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., 1St July [Ref Park 22"/e p. 58 & 21"/e p. 52]
Denominator in crude death rate is mid year population, which is
estimated on first of July of an year.
820. Meningococcal vaccine contains ?
 a) 50 mcg of polysccharide of each strain

 b) 100 mcg of polysccharide of each strain

 c) 1000 mcg of polysccharide of each strain

 d) 5000 mcg of polysccharide of each strain



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., 50 mcg of polysaccharide of each strain [Ref
Park 24th/e p. 176]
Vaccines are available for group A, C, Y and W-125. There is no
group B vaccine available at present. Vaccines are prepared from
capsular polysaccharide.
Bivalent (A, C), trivalent (A, C, W135), and tetravalent (A, C, W135,
Y) vaccines are available.
The vaccines contain 50 mcg of polysaccharide of each individual
strain.
821. How many doses of monovalent
     meningococcal 'C' vaccine is given in
     Infants ?
 a) One

 b) Two

 c) Three

 d) Four



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Two [Ref Park 24th/e p. 176]
Monovalent Men A conjugate vaccine should be given as a single
dose to individuals 1-29 years of age.
For monovalent Men C conjugate vaccine, one single intramuscular
dose is recommended for children aged > 12 months, teenagers and
adults.
Children 2-11 months of age require 2 dose administration at an
interval of at least 2 months and a booster about 1 year thereather.
Quadrivalent vaccines are administered as a single dose to
individuals aged 2 years.
822. Secondary attack rate of mumps:?
 a) 75%

 b) 85%

 c) 95%

 d) < 50%



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., 85% [Ref Park 23'/e p. 147 & 22"d/e p. 139-
140] SAR of some important infectious diseases
Measles           80%
Rubella           90 - 95%
Chicken pox 90%
Pertussis         90%
Mumps             86%
823. Isolation period of TB ?
 a) 2 days after treatment

 b) 1 week after treatment

 c) 2 weeks after treatment

 d) 3 weeks after treatment



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., 3 weeks after treatment [Ref Park 24th/e p. 129]
Period of isolation recommended
Tuberculosis (sputum +) → 2 weeks adult, 6 weeks paediatric.
824. Sensitivity of a screening test tells about
 a) Percentage of disease people among those with a positive test

 b) Percentage of disease people among those with a negative test

 c) Percentage of healthy people among those with a negative test

 d) Percentage of healthy people among those with a positive test



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Percentage of disease people among those with
a positive test
Sensitivity: Ability of a screening test to identify correctly all those
who have the disease (Cases).
Specificity: Ability of a screening test to identify correctly all those
who don't have the disease (healthy).
Positive predictive value (PPV): Ability of a screening test to identify
correctly all those who have the disease, out of all those who test
positive on a screening test.
Negative predictive value (NPV): Ability of a screening test to identify
correctly all those who don't have the disease, out of all those who
test negative on a screening test.
When a screening test is used to diagnose a disease, the test
outcome can be positive (diseased) or negative (healthy), while
the actual health status of the person may be different. In that
setting :
True positive → Diseased people correctly diagnosed as diseased.
False positive → Healthy people wrongly identified as diseased.
True negative → Healthy people correctly identified as healthy.
False negative → Diseased people wrongly identified as healthy.
825. If effective treatment for a disease is
     introduced in a community, what will be
     the effect on incidence [I] and prevalence
     [P] ?
 a) No change in P & I

 b) Both P & I will decrease

 c) P will decrease & I will increase

 d) P will decrease & I will remains the same



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e.,P will decrease & I will remains the same [Ref Park
24th/e p. 66 & 23rdie p. 62]
New effective treatment will cure the patient and thereby decrease
the duration of disease.
So, new effective treatment will affect the duration of disease.
Incidence measures the rate at which new cases are occurring in a
population, It is not influenced by duration. So, new effective
treatment will have no effect on incidence.
On the other hand, prevalence will decrease due to decrease in
duration of disease.
826. A screening test has sensitivity of 90%
     and specificity of 99%. The prevalence of
     disease under investigation is 5 per 1000
     population. What is the PPV of the given
     screening test?
 a) 10

 b) 70

 c) 33

 d) 99



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e.,33 [Ref Park 23rd/e p. 139 & 22"dle p. 132;
Hopefield biostatistics 4thle p. 49]
Positive predictive value is related to sensitivity specificity and
prevalence.
This relationship is represented by Baye's theorem : -
827. Best indicator for spread of TB in a
     community?
 a) Annual infection rate

 b) Prevalence of infection

 c) Case rate

 d) Incidence of new cases



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Annual infection rate [Ref Park 24thle p. 191-195 &
23'/e p. 177]
The following epidemiological-indices are used in tuberculosis
problem measurement and programme strategy
1. Prevalence of infection
It is the percentage of individuals showing positive tuberculin test.
2. Incidence of infection (Annual infection rate)
It is the percentage of population under study who will be newly
infected by M.tuberculosis among the non-infected of the preceding
survey during the course of one year.
It expresses the attacking force of tuberculosis and is also known as
tuberculin conversion index i.e. percentege of new people becoming
tuberculin positive.
In developing countries, every 1% of annual infection rate is said to
correspond to 50 new cases of smear positive pulmonary TB, per
year, for 100000 general population.
It is the best indicator for evalution of TB problem and its trend.
In India, annual infection rate/tuberculin conversion index is 1.7%.
3. Prevalence of disease or case rate
It is the percentage of individuals whose sputum is positive for
tubercle bacilli on microscopic examination.
It is the best available practical index to estimate the number of
infectious cases or case load in a community.
4. Incidence of new cases
It is the percentage of new TB cases (confirmed by bacteriological
examination) per 1000 population occurring during one year.
5. Prevalence of suspected cases
This is based on X-ray examination of chest.
6. Prevalence of drug resistant cases
It is the prevalence of patient excreting tubercle bacilli resistant to
anti-tubercular drugs.
7. Mortality rate
The number of deaths from tuberculosis every year per 1,000
population.
828. For diagnosis of TB, Sputum microscopy
     has ?
 a) High sensitivity & high specificity

 b) High sensitivity & low specificity

 c) Low sensitivity & high specificity

 d) Low sensitivity & low specificity



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e.,Low sensitivity & low specificity
Most rapid method of diagnosis for TB Sputum microscopy.
But, sputum microscopy has low sensitivity and specificity.
Most reliable method for diagnosis of TB -> Culture of tubercular
bacilli.
829. Varicella zoster virus infection is more
     likely to occur in which of the following
     month?
 a) March

 b) August

 c) October

 d) November



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., March [Ref: CECIL Vol. 1, p.1840]
"Varicella occurs most commonly during the late winter and spring
months, the peak being about in March"
830. Most common influenza virus causing
     disease?
 a) Type A

 b) Type B

 c) Type C

 d) Type D



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Type A [Ref Park 24th/e p. 163-166]
There are three viral subtypes : Type A (causes all pandemics and
most epidemics); type B; and type C (not circulating currently).
Currently the influenza viruses circulating in the world are : H, N, of
type A (causes swine flu); H2N2 of type A; H3N2 of type A ; H5N, of
type A (causes birdflu or avian influenza); 117 N9of type A (caused
epidemic of avian influenza in China in 2013); and type B.
Influenza shows cyclic trend with epidemic occuring every 2-3 years
in case of influenza - A and every 4-7 years in case of influenza-B.
Pandemics are caused by only influenza - A every 10-15 years.
Influenza affects all ages and both sexes.
Source of infection of influenza is a clinical case or subclinical case.
Major reservoir of influenza virus exists in animal and birds.
831. Mammalian reservoir for R. prowazekii ?
a) Rodents

b) Dog

c) Cattle

d) Humans



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Humans [Ref Park 24th/e p. 316, 319]
                                         Insect     Mammalian
Disease                   Agent
                                         vector     reservoir
 Typhus group
                          R. prowazekii
a) Epidemic typhus                       Louse      Humans
                          R. typhi
b) Murine typhus                         Flea       Rodents
                          R.
(Endemic typhus)                         Mite       Rodents
                          Tsutsugamushi
c) Scrub typhus
832. Rotavirus vaccine doses should not be initiated beyond which age to prevent
     complications:

 a) 6 weeks

 b) 10 weeks

 c) 12 weeks

 d) 32 weeks



Correct Answer - C

Two live attenuated oral rotavirus vaccines have been licensed for use rotateq and rotarix.
The first dose of these vaccines should be given no later than 12 weeks.
In case of rotarix, vaccination must be completed by 24 weeks.
In case of rotate, last dose of vaccine should be administered by 32 weeks.
Risk of intussusceptions increase if first dose is administered beyond 12 weeks.
Ref: Park 21st edition, page 205.
833. Minimum accepted interval between two
     doses of DPT vaccine?
 a) 2 weeks

 b) 4 weeks

 c) 6 weeks

 d) 8 weeks



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., 4 weeks [Ref Park 24th/e p. 172]
Total three doses are given in primarly immunization with an interval
of 4 weeks between three doses. First booster is given at 16-24
months with second booster at 5-6 years.
DPT, → 6 weeks of age
DPT, → 10 weeks of age
DPT, → 14 weeks of age
DPTim,, → 16-24 months of age
ter DPTB → 5 years of age
834. Post-exposure prophylaxis is indicated
     in ?
 a) HBV

 b) Rabies

 c) Diphtheria

 d) All



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'a' i.e., HBV; 'b' i.e., Rabies; 'c' i.e., Diphtheria
Read the question carefully, examinar is asking about postexposure
prophylaxis (not post-exposure immunization). o In previous
explanation, I have explained the diseases for which post-exposure
prophylaxis is done by immunization
(vaccine or immunoglobulin or both).
In some diseases post-exposure prophylaxis is done by drugs,
i.e., post-exposure chemoprophylaxis : -
HIV → Antiretroviral therapy
Herpes → Famciclovir
Diphtheria
Miningococcal meningitis
835. Healthy carrier is seen in?
 a) Measles

 b) Rubella

 c) Meningococcal meningits

 d) Influanza



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Meningococcal meningitis [Ref Park 24th/e p. 103-
106 & 23"1/e p. 95, 96]
Temporary carrier
Temporary carriers shed the infectious agent for short period of time.
This category may include
Incubatory        Measles, mumps, polio, pertussis
carriers :        (whooping cough), influenza, diphtheria,
                  Hepatitis B.
Convalescent Typhoid, cholera, diphtheria, Pertussis
carriers :        (whooping cough), dysentery.
Healthy           Polio, Cholera, meningococcal
carriers :        meningitis, Salmonellosis, diphtheria
Chronic carrier
Chornic carriers excrete the infectious agent for indefinite period.
Examples : Typhoid, hepatitis B, dysentery, malaria, gonorrhoea,
cerebrospinal menigitis, Diphtheria.
836. Infectivity of convalescent carrier of
     cholera lasts for?
 a) 1-5 days

 b) 1-2 weeks

 c) 2-3 weeks

 d) 4-5 weeks



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., 2-3 weeks
There are following types of carrier in cholera :
Incubatory : Shed vibrios only in the brief incubation period of 1-5
days.
Convalescent : Shed vibrios for 2-3 weeks.
Healthy or contact carrier : Has had subclinical infection and shed
vibrios for less than 10 days.
Chronic carriers : Can shed vibrios for months or years and may
have persistent infection in gall bladder
837. Diagnosis of filariasis is confirmed most
     commonly?
 a) Clinical features

 b) Detection of microfilariae

 c) PCR

 d) Seralogical test



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Detection of microfilariae [Ref Essentials of
clinical microbiology - 188]
Detection of microfilariae (MO
The most commonly used method for diagnosis of filariasis is
detection of microfilariae in blood smear. The blood collection should
be done at night because of nocturnal periodicity of microfilariae
The microfilariae of W. bancrofti and B. malayi occuring in India
display a nocturnal periodicity, i.e., they appear in large number at
night and retreat from the blood stream during the day. This is a
biological adaptation to the nocturnal biting habits of vector
mosquitoes. The maximum density of microfilariae in blood is
reported between 10 pm and 2 am. When the sleeping habits of the
host are altered, a reversal in periodicity has been observed.
Thick film is most commonly used method for detection of
microfilariae.
Concentration technique by membrane filter concentration (MFC)
method is the most sensitive method which can detect low density of
microfilariae in blood.
838. Maximum spread of malaria occurs in
     which month?
 a) March-April

 b) January-February

 c) April-May

 d) September - October



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., September - October [Ref Park 24th/e p. 272-276]
Malaria is a protozoal disease caused by infection with parasite of
genus plasmodium and transmitted to man by certain species of
infected female Anopheline mosquito.
Definitive host - Mosquito (sexual life cycle).
Intermediate host Man (Asexual cycle).
Season In India maximum prevalence is from July to November.
Reservoir - With possible exception of chimpanzees in tropical
Africa, which may carry the infection with P.malariae, no other
animal reservoir is known to exist. Man harbouring sexual forms
(gametocytes) is the only reservoir.
Extrinsic incubation period (in mosquito) 10 to 20 days. It is the
period of time required for the development of parasite from
gametocyte to sporozoite stage (infective stage to man) in the body
of mosquito.
839. Not true about diphtheria vaccine?
 a) Can be given as pentavalent vaccine

 b) For infant DPT is the vaccine of choice

 c) First dose is given at 6 weeks of age

 d) all of these



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'D All of these, [Ref Park 24thie p. 172]
Diphtheria vaccine is a toxoid.
It is given as trivalent vaccine DPT - Preparation of choice for
immunization of infant
First dose is given at 6 weeks of age
Pentavalent vaccine provides protection to a child from 5 life
threatening disease-diphtheria, pertussis, tetanus, hepatitis B and
haemophilus influenza type b (Hib). Giving pentavalent vaccine
reduces the number of pricks to a child. When used, it replaces
Hepatitis B and DPT primary vaccination schedule at 6, 10 and 14
weeks in the immunization programme, except that the birth dose of
hepatitis B and booster doses of DPT are continued.
840. Which vaccine is used to prevent death
     from pneumonia in children?
 a) Measles vaccine

 b) Rubella vaccine

 c) Chickenpox vaccine

 d) Influenza viral vaccine



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e.,Measles vaccine [Ref Park 24th/e p. 182]
Three vaccines have potential of reducing death from
pneumonia :-
Measles vaccine
HIB vaccine (Haemophilus influenzee type B)
Pneumococcal vaccine
These vaccines work to reduce the incidence of bacterial
pneumonia.
   841. Antiboiotic of choice for severe
        pneumonia in 1 year all child?
    a) Cotrimoxazole

    b) Ciprofloxacin

    c) Benzyl penicillin

    d) Tetracycline



   Correct Answer - C
   Ans. is 'c' i.e., Benzyl penicillin [Ref Park 24`h/e p. 181,182]
   Antibiotics of choice for treatment of acute respiratory
   infections in children aged 2 months - 5years
1. No pneumonia (Cough or cold) → No antibiotic
2. Pneumonia (not severe) -s cotrimoxazole
3. Severe pneumonia - Benzyl penicillin or ampicillin or
   chloramphenicol
4. Very severe disease 4 Chloramphenicol
   Antibiotics of choice for treatment of acute respiratory
   infections in infants younger than 2 months
1. No pneumonia (Cough or cold) 4 No antibiotic
2. All pneumonia (severe or not severe) 4 (Benzyl penicillin or
   ampicillin) plus gentamycin.
842. Reconstituted measles vaccine should
               be used with in -
 a) 1 hour

 b) 3 hour

 c) 6 hour

 d) 12 hour



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., 1 hour
"The reconstituted vaccine should be kept on ice and used within
one hour ". —Park Measles vaccine :
Type: Live attenuated, lyophilized (Freeze dried) vaccine,
Measles vaccine is live attenuated, lypholized (Freez dried) vaccine.
Strains of virus used to prepare vaccine are Edmonston Zagreb
strain (most common), Schwartz strain and Moraten strain.
It is given subcutaneously in to middle one-third of antero-lateral
aspect of thigh.
It is given at the age of 9 months (age can be lowerered to 6
months in epidemics & malnutrition) and is repeated at 16-24
months of age.
It has protective efficacy (sero-conversion) of 95%. Vaccination
provide life long immunity.
Incubation period of vaccine induced measles is 7 days.
In post-exposure prophylaxis, measles vaccine should be given
within 2-3 days of exposure. Incubation period of measles virus is 10
days. Incubation period of live attenuated measles virus of live
vaccine is 7 days. Thus, if the vaccine is given within 2-3 days of
exposure, the replication of vaccine virus takes preference over
replication of wild virus.
Diluent used for measles vaccine reconstitution is distilled water or
sterile water.
Reconstituted vaccine should be used within 1 hour.
Usual temperature for cold chain storage is +2 to +8°C.
843. Color of box containing drugs for
     treatment of category I of TB -
 a) Red

 b) Blue

 c) Yellow

 d) Green



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e.,Red [Ref Park 24th/e p. 199]
844. Major reservoir of KFD ?
 a) Human

 b) Squirrels

 c) Cattle

 d) Monkey



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e.,Squirrels
KFD, also known as 'monkey disease' is a hemorrhagic fever
caused by flavivirus belonging to group-B arbovirus. Disease is
common in four districts of Karnataka : Shimoga, North Kannda,
South Kanada and Chikamagaloor. KFD was first recognized in
1957 in Shimoga district of Karnataka.
Major vector for transmission of KFD is hard tick (Haemophysalis
spinigera and H. turtura). But, soft tick can also transmit the disease,
especially outside the India.
Rats and squirrels are the major reservoir. Monkey acts as
amplifying host and man is incidental dead-end host, there is no
man-to-man transmission.
845. Threshold level of herd immunity for
     Pertussis is?
 a) 80%

 b) 70%

 c) 90%

 d) 50%



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., 90%
Herd immunity
It is the level of resistance of a community or group of people to a
particular disease.
It occurs when the vaccination of a portion of the population (or
herd) provides protection to unprotected (non? vaccinated)
individuals.
Advantage of herd immunity
It is not necessary to achieve 100% immunization to control a
disease by providing herd immunity.
When a certain percentage of population, is vaccinated, the spread
of disease is effectively stopped.
This critical percentage is referred to as herd immunity threshold.
Disease               Herd immunity threshod
Diphtheria        →     85%
Measles           →      83-94%
Mumps             →     75-86%
Pertussis         →     92-94%
Polio            →     80-86%
Rubella          →      80-85%
Small pox        →     83-85%
846. What is the commonest form of plague?
 a) Bubonic plague

 b) Pneumonic plague

 c) Septicaemic plague

 d) Hemorrhagic plague



Correct Answer - A
The commonest form of plague is bubonic plague.
Pneumonic plague occurs in less than 5% of patients.
Septicaemic plague occurs rarely except for accidental laboratory infections.
Ref: Park 21st edition, page 270.
847. Most common source of Diphtheria
 a) Case

 b) Carrier

 c) Both

 d) None



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Carrier
Diphtheria is an acute infectious disease caused by toxigenic strains
of corynebacterium diphtheriae.
Source of infection cases or carriers; carriers are common sources
of infection, their ratio is estimated to be 95 carriers for 5 clinical
cases.
Infective period       →       14 - 28 days from the onset of disease.
Age group              →       1 to 5 years
Sex                  →        Both sexes
Incubation period →           2 - 6 days
   848. WHO VISION 2020 initiative includes ?
    a) Corneal ulcer

    b) Trachoma blindness

    c) Diabetic retinopathy

    d) Vernal kerato Conjunctivitis



   Correct Answer - B
   Ans. is 'b' i.e., Trachoma blindness
   After the realization that unless blindness control efforts are
   intensified, the prevalence of blindness will double by 2020 AD, the
   WHO along with an International Partnership committee launched
   the Vision 2020 Initiative in 1995.
   The diseases identified for global elimination include : ?
1. Cataract blindness
2. Trachoma blindness and transmission
3. Onchocerciasis
4. Avoidable causes of childhood blindness
5. Refractive errors and low vision
    Indian vision of 2020 includes the following seven diseases.
1. Cataract blindness
2. Glaucoma
3. Trachoma blindness and transmission
4. Diabetic retinopathy
5. Childhood blindness
6. Corneal blindness
7. Refractive errors and low vision
849. Prevalence of RHD in India in 5-15 years
     age group?
 a) 1-2 per 1000

 b) 5-7 per 1000

 c) 10-12 per 1000

 d) 13-15 per 1000



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., 5-7 per 1000 [Ref Park 24th/e p. 397]
In India, RHD is prevalent in the range of 5-7 per thousand in 5-15
years age group and there are about 1 million RHD cases in India.
RHD constitutes 20-30% of hospital admissions due to CVD in India.
Streptococcal infections are very common especially in children
living in under -privileged conditions, and RF is reported to occur in
1-3 per cent of those infections.
850. Jai Vigyan Mission mode project in India
     is for?
 a) Measles

 b) TB

 c) Rheumatic fever

 d) STD



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Rheumatic fever [Ref Park 24tVe p. 397]
Jai Vigyan Mission Mode project on Community Control of RF/RHD
in India is being carried out with four main components, viz. to study
the epidemiology of streptococcal sore throats, establish registries
for RF and RHD, vaccine development for streptococcal infection
and conducting advanced studies on pathological aspects of RF and
RHD.
851. Which does not have Live births as
     denominator?
 a) Infant mortality rate

 b) Neonatal mortality rate

 c) Child mortality rate

 d) Child death rate



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Child death rate [Ref Park 24thle p. 608-612]
CDR = No. of deaths of children aged 1-4 years / Total No. of
children aged 1-4 years.
852. Dual record system is useful for
     estimation of?
 a) Literacy

 b) Fertility

 c) Population density

 d) Sex ratio



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Fertility [Ref Park 24th/e p. 878]
Sample registration system (SRS), initiated in mid 1960s provides
reliable estimates of birth (fertility) and death (mortality) rates at
state and national levels.
It is a dual record system,consisting of continuous enumeration of
birth and death by an enumerator and an independent survey every
6 months by an investigator supervisor.
Main objective of SRS is to provide reliable estimates of birth rate,
death rate and infant mortality rate at the natural division level for
rural areas and at state level for urban areas.
Infant mortality rate is the decisive indicator for estimation of sample
size at natural division.
Sample design for SRS is uni-stage stratified simple random
sample. SRS now covers entire country.
853. Which of the following is false about
     intra-uterine devices (IUDs)?
 a) Multiload Cu-375 is a third generation intra-uterine device (IUD)

 b) Copper devices are effective as post-coital contraceptives

 c) LNG-20 (Mirena) has an effective life of 5 years

 d) Pregnancy rates of Lippes Loop and T Cu-200 are similar



Correct Answer - A
Multioad Cu-375 is a newer copper intra-uterine device (IUD).
The copper devices comprise the second generation IUDs.
The non-medicated or inert devices are the first generation IUDs and
the hormone-releasing devices are the third generation IUDs
Ref: Park’s Textbook Of Preventive And Social Medicine, By K.
Park, 19th Edition, Pages 393-395.
854. Perinatal mortality rate include which of
     the following?
 a) Abortions + Still birth early neonatal deaths

 b) Still birth + early neonatal deaths

 c) Abortions + early neonatal deaths

 d) Deaths up to 42 dys after birth



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is b' i.e., Still birth + early neonatal death
855. Poor man's iron source is?
 a) Almond

 b) Grapes

 c) Soya

 d) Jaggery



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Jaggery [Ref Park 24th/e p. 661 & 23rd/e p. 623]
There are two major forms of iron :?
1) Haem-iron
It is better absorbed but is less important source of iron in Indian
diet. It is mainly found in foods of animal origin, e.g. liver, meat,
poultry and fish.
2) Non-haem iron
It is poorly absorbed but is the important source of iron in Indian diet.
It is mainly found in foods of vegetable origin, e.g. cereales, green
leafy vetetables, legumes, nuts, oilseeds, juggery, and dried fruits.
Among dry fruits, cashew nut has maximum iron (9%) followed by
almonds (7%), and pistachos (7%).
Iron of milk is low in all mammalian species.
Jaggery is considered as poor man's iron source. It contains a good
amount of iron along with vitamin-A.
856. An 70 kg farmer is consuming 56 grams
     proteins, 275 grams carbohydrate and 60
     grams lipids. He consuming?
 a) Less calories

 b) More calories

 c) Adequate calories

 d) Connot be commented



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Less calories [Ref Read below]
Protein and carbohydrate both provide 4 cal per gram and fat
provides 9 cal per gram.
Thus the farmer is taking (cal or Kcal per day) = (56 x 4) + (275 x 4)
+ (60 x 9) = 1864
857. For every 100 kilocalories, vitamin B,
     required is -
 a) 0.05 mg

 b) 0.5 mg

 c) 5.0 mg

 d) 1.0 gn



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is ‘a' i.e., 0.05 rug
Thiamine is required 0.5 mg per 1000 K. cal of energy intake,
i.e., 0.05 mg per 100 Kcal.
858. Gomez classification is based on ?
 a) Weight retardation

 b) Height retardation

 c) Mid arm circumference

 d) Stunting



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Weight retardation
859. Kanawati index is used for ?
 a) Air population

 b) PEM

 c) Obesity definition

 d) Infectivity



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., PEM
Kanawati index is used to classify protein energy malnutrition (PEM).
860. Human milk with respect to cow milk has
     -
 a) Less fat

 b) Less protein

 c) Less carbohydrate

 d) a and b



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Less fat; `b' Less protein
Human milk has less fat, less protein, more carbohydrates and less
calcium, in comparison to cow milk.
Human milk has less sodium, potassium and chloride. However,
these substances are in correct amount (though less) in human milk.
Salts (meq/L)Cow's milk Human milk
Sodium           25 (too much) 6.5 (correct amount)
Chloride         29 (too much) 12 (correct amount)
Potassium        35 (too much) 14 (correct amount)
   861. Most common nutritional problem in
        India?
    a) Low birth weight

    b) Fluorosis

    c) Iran deficiency anemia

    d) Vitamin A deficiency



   Correct Answer - C
   Ans. is 'c' i.e.,Iron deficiency anemia [Ref Park 24thle p. 677, 661-
   667]
   The major nutritional problem in India are :
1. Low birth weight
2. Iodine deficiency disorders (IDD)
3. Protein energy malnutrition
4. Endemic fluorosis
5. Vitamin A deficiency
6. Lathyrism
7. Iron deficiency anemia
    Iron deficiency anemia is the most widspread among these.
862. Pulses are deficient in ?
 a) Methionirfe

 b) Lysine

 c) Threonine

 d) All



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e.,Methionine [Ref : Park 23'/e p. 628 & 21"/e p. 578]
Some amino acids are deficient in a particular food, called limiting
amino acids. For example, cereals and wheat are deficient in
threonine and lysine, pulses are mainly deficient in methionine and
cysteine, and maize is deficient in tryptophan and lysine.
Supplementary action of proteins : If two or more food items eaten
together, their proteins supplement the deficient amino acid of each
other. For example cereals are deficient in threonine and lysine,
whereas pulses are deficient in methionine and cystein. If both are
taken together, their proteins complement each other and provide a
more balanced and complete protein intake.
863. Daily iron requirement in healthy Indian
     male is-
 a) 35 mg

 b) 17 mg

 c) 10 mg

 d) 5 mg



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b i.e., 17 mg
                          Iron             Recommended
Group
                          absorbed/day(mg) intake
Adult male                0.84             17
Adult female
                          1.65                21
(mensturating)
                                              35 (extra 14
Pregnant woman            2.80 (extra 1.15)
                                              mg/day)
Lactating woman (0-6
                          1.65                21
months)
Infant (6-12 months)      0.7                 S
Adolescent boys (13-15
                          1.6                 32
years)
Adolescent girls (13-15
                          1.36                27
years)
864. Not a primary air pollutant?
 a) SO2

 b) CO,

 c) Ozon

 d) VOCs



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e.,Ozone [Ref Park 24tVe p. 770]
Air pollution is the introduction of chemicals particulate matter, or
biological material into the atmosphere that cause harm or
discomfort to humans or other living organisms, or damages the
natural environment. An air pollutant is known as a substance in the
air that can cause harm to humans and the-environment.
865. Number of holes in mosquito net [per sq.
     inch] ?
 a) 50

 b) 150

 c) 100

 d) 200



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., 150 [Ref Park 24th/e p. 810 & 23'/e p. 773]
The best pattern of mosquito net is the rectangular net.
There should not be a single rent in the net.
The Size of openings in the net is of utmost importance, the size
should not exceed 0.0475 inch in any diameter.
The number of holes in one square inch in usually 150.
   866. In malaria control, insecticide used for
        insectiside treated bed nets (ITBN)-
    a) Deltamethrin

    b) Malathion

    c) Lindone

    d) Fenitrothion



   Correct Answer - A
   Ans. is 'a' i.e., Deltamethrin
   Insecticide Treated Bed Nets (ITBN) Programme (esp. deltamethrin)
   has resulted in significant decline in malaria incidence and API
1. Average decline in anopheline mosquito density - 68%
2. Average decline in cuicine mosquito density - 50%
3. Chemicals used in ITBN Programme : Synthetic pyretheroids
   Deltamethrin : 2.5% in dosage of 25 mg/m2
1. Cyfluthrin: 5% in dosage of 50 mg/m2
2. Other insecticides used : Permethrin, Lambdacyhalothrin,
   Etofenprox, Cypermethrin
   Effectiveness of pyrethroids: For 6-12 months (Retreatment every 6
   months)
   Long-lasting insecticidal mosquito nets (LLINs) : Also use pyrethroid
   insecticides, and a chemical binder that allows the nets to be
   washed > 20 times, allowing use for > 3 years.
867. Test for coliform count ?
 a) Eijkman test

 b) Casoni's test

 c) Nitrate test

 d) Urease test



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Eijkman test
Adler analysing presumptive coliform count, E coli count is cofirmed
by other tests like Eijk m an t test and indole production.
868. Not a contact poison:
     MAHE 14
a) Pyrethrum

b) Paris green

c) Rotenone

d) Eucalyptus oil



Correct Answer - A
Ans.is. A. Pyrethrum
869. Which of the following is not a indoor air
     pollutant?
 a) Carbon monoxide

 b) Nitrous oxide

 c) Radon

 d) Mercury



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd i.e., Mercury
Indoor air pollution refers to chemical. biological and physical
contamination of indoor air, i.e. the pollution of air with in and around
building and structures.
As most of the people work, study, eat, drink and sleep in enclosed
environments (i.e. indoor) where air circulation may be restricted —>
Most people spend large portion of time indoors, as much as 80-
90% of their lives. Therefore, more people suffer from indoor air
pollution than outdoor pollution.
Basic Information on Pollutants and Sources
of Indoor Air Pollution
Asbestos
Biological Pollutants
Carbon Monoxide (CO)
Formaldehyde/Pressed Wood Products
Lead (Pb)
Nitrogen Dioxide (NO2)
Pesticides
Radon (Rn)
Indoor Particulate Matter
Secondhand Smoke/ Environmental Tobacco Smoke
Stoves, Heaters, Fireplaces and Chimneys
Volatile Organic Compounds (VOCs)
870. The source of endogenous radiation is
a) Radon

b) Potassium

c) Thorium

d) Uranium



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e.. Potassium
o Radiation is part of man's environment.
871. Range of flight of Aedes mosquito is ?
 a) 1 km

 b) Less than 100 m

 c) 400 m

 d) 10 kms



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Less than 100 m [Ref Park 23'/e p. 771 &
22"d/e p. 715]
Aedes do not fly over long distances; usually less than 100 metres
(110 yards). Anopheles → 3 - 5 Kms
Culex → 11 Kms
Aedes → 100 m
872. In positively skewed deviation ?
 a) Mean = Median = Mode

 b) Mean > Medians > Mode

 c) Mode > Median > Mean

 d) None of the above



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Mean > Medians > Mode
873. Chi-square test is for?
 a) Standard error of Mean

 b) Standard error of Proportion

 c) Standard error of difference between 2 Means

 d) Standard error of difference between Proportions



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Standard error of difference between Proportions
Chi-square test measures the significance of difference between two
proportions by testing, whether the observed frequencies differ
significantly from the expected frequencies.
874. Which of the following defines
     movement across scioeconomic status.
 a) Social equality

 b) Social upliftment

 c) Social mobility

 d) Social insurance



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Social Mobility [Ref Park 23' le p. 688 & 22"d/e p.
639]
Social mobility is the degree to which an individual's family or
group's social status can change throughout the course of their life
through a system of social hierarechy, i.e. Social mobility refers to
movement of individuals/families across different socioeconomic
levels.
875. All are non-parametric tests except -
 a) Chi-square test

 b) Sign test

 c) Fisher exact test

 d) Student t-test



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Student t-test
876. The number of Anganwadi workers
     supervised by a Mukhyasevika is:
 a) 10

 b) 15

 c) 25

 d) 30



Correct Answer - C
MukhyaSevika is a middle level supervisor. She supervises 20 to 25
Anganwadi workers. She is required to be a graduate in social work
or home science or a related field. She is trained for three months.
Ref: Health policies and programmes in India, D.K. Taneja 11th
edition page: 312
877. Which of the following has responsibility
     of data collection for active malaria
     surveillance at PHC level ?
 a) DHO [District Health Officer]

 b) MPW [Multipurpose worker]

 c) MO-PHC [Medical Officer-PHC]

 d) DMO [District Medical Officer]



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., MO-PHC [Medical Officer-PHC]
[Ref Park 24"/e p. 433]
"The Medical Officer-PHC has the overall responsibility for
surveillance and laboratory services, and also supervices the
spray".
878. Which of the following conditions must
     be fulfilled for a PHC to become a first
     referral unit ?
 a) 4-6 beds

 b) 15 workers

 c) Emergency obsteric care

 d) Basic laboratory services



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Emergency obsteric care [Ref Textbook of Indian
Health care - 728]
Critical determinants of a first feferral unit
24-hour delivery services including normal and assisted deliveries
Emergency obstetric care including surgical interventions like
caesarean sections and other medical interventions, New-born care,
Emergency care of sick children, Full range of family planning
services including laproscopic services, Safe abortion services,
Treatment of STI / RTI, Blood storage facility, Essential laboratory
services, Referral (transport) services.
879. Acculturation is?
 a) Traige

 b) Cultural changes due to socialisation

 c) Attitude

 d) Belief



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Cultural changes due to socialisation
Acculturation is a process of social, psychological, and cultural
change that stems from the balancing of two cultures while
adapting to the prevailing culture of the society. Acculturation
is a process in which an individual adopts, acquires and
adjusts to a new cultural environment.
880. The ICDS scheme is sponsored by
 a) Ministry of health & family welfare

 b) Ministry of Social welfare

 c) Ministry of education

 d) None



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Ministry of social welfare
881. True about NPCDCS is all, EXCEPT:
 a) Separate centre for stroke, DM

 b) Implementation in some 5 states over 10 district

 c) CHC has facilities for diagnosis and treatment of CVD, Diabetes

 d) Day care facilities are available at subcentre



Correct Answer - C
The NPCDCS program has two components viz. (i) Cancer & (ii)
Diabetes, CVDs & stroke.
These two components have been integrated at different levels as
far as possible for optimal utilization of the resource.

The activities at State, District, CHC and Sub Centre level have
been planned under the programme and will be closely monitored
through NCD cell at different levels.

The strategies proposed will be implemented in 20,000 Sub Centres
and 700 Community Health Centre in 100 Districts across 21 States
during 2010-12

Early diagnosis of diabetes, CVDs, Stroke and Cancer is done
at District Hospital, not at CHC.

Ref: NPCDCS Operational Guidelines, DGHS, GOI, Page 6;
http:/health.bih.nic.in/Docs/Guidelines-NPCDCS.pdf.
882. International Red Cross was founded by:
 a) Henry Dunant

 b) John D Rockfeller

 c) Marie Curie

 d) None of the above



Correct Answer - A
The Red Cross is a non-political international humanitarian organisation founded by Swiss
businessman Henry Dunant.
Ref: Park 21st edition page: 858.
883. Jai Vigyan National Mission is for?
 a) Adolescent girls health

 b) Mother & child health [MCH]

 c) Science & technology

 d) Child labour prevention



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Science & technology [Ref Information p. 1997-
98]
The Union Minister for human resource Development, Dr. Murli
Manohar Joshi, has said that scientific Institutions would take up 21
important development projects as part of the Jai Vigyan National
Mission with focus on science and technology. These projects would
be in areas such as food security, energy conservations, health
care, disaster management and bio-diversity. Scientific and R and D
institutions would take up one project in 1999. All the projects would
be given green channel treatment with procedures relaxed he said
while participating at the annual sessions of the 86t5 Indian Science
Congress in Chennal on Jan.3.
The minister said he had directed the department of Bio-technology
to institute 10 awards every year for outstanding young scientists in
biosciences. This would encourage high quality research of
excellence and relevance. As achieving excellence was dependent
in innovative talents which in turn needed identification and nurturing
from an early age, a new scheme to select under 18 youngsters of
outstanding talent and to provide them with necessary ambience
and opportunities for harnessing their talent and been instituted.
884. Colored kit for STD treatment is which
     type of approach?
 a) Preventive

 b) Symptomatic

 c) Syndromic

 d) Rehabilitative



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Syndromic [Ref Park 23' /e. p. 332-336]
In 1988, World Health Organization introduced the concept
of Syndromic management'.
In syndromic management, diagnosis and treatment is not based on
specific diseases identified by testing but rather on syndromes,
which is a group of clinical findings. Treatment is generally given for
all or at least most commonly seen diseases or organisms that could
cause that syndrome.
Pre-packed colour coded STI/RTI kits have been provided for free
supply to all designated STI/RTI clinics.
Kit 1 → Grey, for urethral discharge, ano-rectal discharge, cervicitis.
Kit 2 → Green, for vaginitis
Kit 3 → White, for genital ulcers
Kit 4 → Blue, for genital ulcers
Kit 5 → Red, for genital ulcers
Kit 6 → Yellow, for lower abdominal pain
Kit 7 → Black, for scortal swelling.
885. In RNTCP microscopic center is
     recommended for how much population
     ?
 a) 5000

 b) 10000

 c) 50000

 d) 100000



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., 100000
The RNTCP designated 'Microscopy centre' is established for
100000 population in planes (50000 in hilly and moutain areas). For
every 5 microscopy centers (500000 population), there is one Senior
TB laboratory supervisor (STLS). STLS rechecks all positive slides
and 10% of all negative slides. Sputum microscopic examination
during case finding is done in designated miroscopy centers.
One tuberculosis unit is established for 500000 population in planes
(250000 population in hilly/tribal areas).
There is one state drug store (SDS) for every 50 million population.
  886. PERT is which type of management
       technique?
    a) Based on behavioral science

    b) Qualitative

    c) Quantitative

    d) None of the above



   Correct Answer - C
   Ans. is 'c' i.e.,Quantitative
   Management in human organization activity is simply the act of
   getting people together to accomplish desired goals and objectives.
   There are two major types of methods of management.
1. Methods based on behavioural sciences.
2. Quantitative methods.
887. Which of the following is Socratic
     method of communication?
 a) Lectures

 b) Group discussion

 c) Group discussion

 d) Mass media



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Group discussion [Ref Park 24th le p. 892
Two-way communication (socratic method)
It is method of communication in which both the communicator and
the audience take part and the information is transferred in both
direction.
Examples→ Group discussion, Panel discussion, symposium,
workshop, conferences.
888. World heart day is celebrated on ?
 a) 29th September

 b) 28th September

 c) 8th September

 d) 1st December



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., 29th September [Ref Internet]
29th September → World heart day
28th September → World rabies day
8th September → World literacy day
Ph December → World AIDS day
  889. Minimum floor space recommended for
       worker according to Factories Act?
    a) 1000 Cu ft

    b) 500 Cu ft

    c) 200 Cu ft

    d) 100 Cu ft



   Correct Answer - B
   Ans. is 'b' i.e., 500 Cu ft [Ref Park 24th /e p. 852]
   The first Indian Factories act dates as for back as 1881.
   The act was revised and amended several times, the lates being the
   factories (Amendment) act, 1987.
   Following standards are recommended
1. A minimum of 500 Cu ft of space for each worker (not taking into
   account space more than 14 feet above the group level).
2. For factories installed before the 1948 Act, a minimum of 350 Cu ft
   of space per worker.
3. A safety officer in every factory where in 1000 or workers are
   employed
4. A welfare officer in every factory where in 500 or more workers are
   employed.
5. A canteen where in more than 250 or more workers are employed.
6. Creches where in more than 30 women workers are employed.
   890. Safety officer is recommended where
       factory has how many workers [In
       factory Act] ?
    a) 250 or more

    b) 500 or more

    c) 1000 or more

    d) 2000 or more



   Correct Answer - C
   Ans. is 'c' i.e., 1000 or more [Ref Park 24th/e p. 852]
   Following standards are recommended :
1. A minimum of 500 Cu ft of space for each worker (not taking into
   account space more than 14 feet above the group level).
2. For factories installed before the 1948 Act, a minimum of 350 Cu ft
   of space per worker.
3. A safety officer in every factory where in 1000 or workers are
   employed
4. A welfare officer in every factory where in 500 or more workers are
   employed.
5. A canteen where in more than 250 or more workers are employed.
6. Creches where in more than 30 women workers are employed
  891. Category 4 biomedical waste include ?
    a) Human anatomical waste

    b) Animal waste

    c) Cytotoxic drug

    d) Waste sharps



   Correct Answer - D
   Ans. is 'd' i.e., Waste sharps [Ref Park 23"1/e p. 793-794]
   BMWs in India are managed under 'Biomedical Waste Management
   and Handling Rules 1998' with exercising powers 6, 8, 25 of
   Environmental Protection Act 1986 (under Ministry of Environment
   and Forests).
   Schedules are :-
1. Schedule I : Categories of BMW, their treatment and disposal.
2. Schedule II : Color coding and type of container for BMW disposal.
3. Schedule III : Labels for BMW containers/bags.
4. Schedule IV : Labels for transport of BMW containers/bags.
5. Schedule V : Standards for treatment and disposal of BMW.
6. Category No. 7 → Solid (waste generated from disposal items other
   than the waste sharps such as tubings, catheters, intravenous sets
   etc.)
892. One of the following is not true of
     International Classification of Disease -
 a) It is revised once in 10 years

 b) It was devised by UNICEF

 c) The 10th revision consists of 21 major chapters

 d) It is accepted for National and International use



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., It was devised by UNICEF
ICD was devised by WHO.
893. Tensor tympani is attached at ?
 a) Malleus

 b) Incus

 c) Stapes

 d) Tympanic membrane



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Malleus [Ref Gray's Anatomy 38th le p. 485]
Tympanic cavity has two muscles :
894. The maxillary sinus opens into middle meatus at the level of:
 a) Hiatus semilunaris

 b) Bulla ethmoidalis

 c) Infundibulum

 d) None of the above



Correct Answer - A
The maxillary sinus is the largest of the paranasal sinuses and is located in the maxilla,
lateral to the nasal cavity and inferior to the orbit.
The maxillary sinus opens into the posterior aspect of the hiatus semilunaris in the middle
meatus.
The infraorbital nerve (CN V-2) primarily innervates the maxillary sinus.
895. Vesicles on external ear are seen in
 a) Otitis externa

 b) Malignant otitis externa

 c) Herpes zoster

 d) Clear cell carcinoma



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Herpes zoster [Ref Head and Neck Surgical
Pathology p. 53]
Ramsay Hunt syndrome
It is lower motor neuron type of facial palsy due to Varicella (herpes)
zoster. Pain is often a prominent feature and vesicles are
seen in the ipsilateral ear, on the hard palate and/or on anterior two
third of tongue. It may involve other cranial nerves-V,
VIII, IX and X and cervical branches (C2, C3 & C4) that have
anastomotic communications with facial nerve. This results
in features like :
Anaesthesia of face
Giddiness
Hearing impairment along with VII nerve palsy.
896. First line treatment for mild retraction
     pocket in the ear is
 a) Observation

 b) Antibiotics

 c) Tympanostomy tube

 d) Surgical excision



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Antibiotics [Ref Conquering Otitis media by
Charles Bluestone p. 95]
Retraction pocket
 It must be treated by an otolaryngologist.
1) Antibiotics
A mild retraction pocket that is present in a fluid - filled middle ear
can first be treated with antibiotics.
2) Tympanostomy
 If antibiotics does not work, a tympanostomy tube is usually
inserted, and in most cases, the eardrum will return to normal.
 If the retraction pocket is very deep, a tube should be inserted,
bypassing the antibiotic treatment.
3) Surgical excision
If the retraction pocket still does not go away, the deformed eardrum
should be operated on to prevent a cholesteatoma from developing.
 Once a cholesteatoma develops, surgery is the only way to remove
it.
897. Cauliflower ear seen in:
 a) Hematoma of the auricle

 b) Carcinoma of the auricle

 c) Fungal infection of the auricle

 d) Congenital deformity



Correct Answer - A
Cauliflower ear (boxer's ear, wrestler's ear) is an acquired deformity
of the outer ear.
In this injury, the ear can shrivel up and fold in on itself and appear
pale, giving it a cauliflower-like appearance, hence the term
cauliflower ear.
Wrestlers, boxers and martial artists in particular are susceptible to
this type of injury. When the ear is struck and a blood clot develops
under the skin, or the skin is sheared from the cartilage, the
connection of the skin to the cartilage is disrupted.
898. In electrocochleography:
 a) It measures middle ear latency

 b) Outer hair cells are mainly responsible for cochlear mi​‐
    crophonics and summation potential

 c) Summation potential is a compound of synchronus audi​tory
    nerve potential

 d) Total AP represents endocochlear receptor potential to an
    external auditory stimulus



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is. B. Outer hair cells are mainly responsible for cochlear
mi​crophonics and summation potential
899. Which fracture of the petrous bone will
     cause facial nerve palsy:
 a) Longitudinal fractures

 b) Transverse fractures

 c) Mastoid

 d) Facial nerve injury is always complete



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is. B. Transverse fractures
900. Ossicle M/C involved in CSOM:
a) Stapes

b) Long process of incus

c) Head of malleus

d) Handle of malleus



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is. B. Long process of incus
901. Mac Ewan's triangle is the landmark for:
a) Maxillary sinus

b) Mastoid antrum

c) Frontal sinus

d) None



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is. B. Mastoid antrum
902. Cristae are seen in?
 a) Utricle

 b) Saccule

 c) Semicircular canal

 d) Otolith membrane



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Semicircular canal [Ref Dhingra Sth/e p. 16]
Vestibular apparatus
The vestibular apparatus within the inner ear detects head motion
and position and transduces this information to a neural signal.
903. Function of saccule is?
 a) Linear acceleration

 b) Angular acceleration

 c) Senses position of head

 d) Rotational movement



Correct Answer - A:C
Ans. is 'a' i.e.,Linear acceleration & 'c' i.e.,Senses position of
head
904. Earliest age for doing BERA is?
 a) In utero - before birth

 b) At birth

 c) 3 months

 d) 6 months



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., At birth [Ref Logan Turner 10thle p. 254; PL
Dhingra 4th/e p. 28]
"Worldwide screening is largely performed in newborn nursery with
the first screening test performed from birth until 10 days of age"
905. Most common malignancy of middle ear
     is
a) Glomus tumor

b) Squamous cell carcinoma

c) Adenocarcinoma

d) Sarcoma



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e.,Squamous cell carcinoma [Ref Textbook of ENT
by Rakesh Shrivastav 2"/e p. 67]
Squamous cell carcinoma is the most common malignant tumor of
the middle ear.
Other forms of malignancy like adenocarcinoma and sarcoma are
rare.
906. Most common benign tumor of ear canal
     is
 a) Osteomas

 b) Sebaceous adenoma

 c) Papilloma

 d) Ceruminoma



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Osteomas [Ref Dhingra 6thle p. 107; Bansal ENT
p. 160; Encyclopedia of Imaging, Baert p. 1318]
Osteomas/ exostoses → most common benign tumors of the
external auditory canal.
Squamous cell carcinomas → Most common malignant tumors of
the external auditory canal.
907. Diplacusis is
 a) Hearing sound with diminished intensity

 b) Hearing sounds of two different tones

 c) Hearing extremely loud sound

 d) Perceiving light on production of sound



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e.,Hearing sounds of two different tones [Ref Tuli
lst/e p. 114]
Monaural diplacusis :- In monaural diplacusis, a listener hears two
tones when a single tone is presented to a single ear, i.e. one ear
hears two different tones when presented one.
Binaural diplacusis :- In binaural diplacusis, a listener hears two
different tones in right & left ear when a single tone is presented to
both ears.
Both monoaural and binaural diplacusis are caused by
inhomogenities in the cochlea that also give rise to spontaneous
otoacoustic emissions.
908. Which semicircular canal is most
     commonly involved in BPPV?
 a) Horizontal

 b) Posterior

 c) Superior

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Posterior [Ref Dhingra Sth/e p. 51]
BPPV is thought to be caused by displacement of otoconia (mineral
crystals) from the vestibule of inner ear into the semicircular canals.
The posterior semicircular canal is most commonly involved, though
superior and horizontal canals canal can also be affected.
Otoconia or ear rocks are small crystals of calcium carbonate
derived structure in the utricle which migrate into semicircular canals
and cause BPPV. While saccules also contains otoconia, they are
not able to migrate into the semicircular canals.
909. Most common ossicle affected due to
     trauma -
 a) Malleus

 b) Incus

 c) Stapes

 d) All affected similarly



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e, Incus [Ref Hearing : Practical Guide by Tysome p.
96]
"Significant head injury or direct trauma to the middle ear can result
in subluxation of one or more of the ossicles, the incus being the
most commonly affected
910. Threshold of hearing in a young normal
     adult is ?
 a) 0 dB

 b) 10 dB

 c) 20 dB

 d) 30 dB



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is'a'i.e.,0 dB
[Rd Dhingra 4n/e p. 21]
Audiometric zero
Threshold of hearing, i.e. The faintest intensity which a normal
healthy person can hear will vary from person to person.
The International Standards Organisation (ISO) adopted a standard
for this, which is represented as the zero level on the audiometer (0
dB).
According to ISO, audiometric zero is the mean value of minimal
audible intensity in a group of normally hearing healthy young adults.
911. Gradenigo's syndrome involves all of the
     following cranial nerves, EXCEPT:
 a) IV

 b) V

 c) VI

 d) VII



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. IV
Gradenigo’s syndrome is characterized by facial pain, particularly in
the first division of the trigeminal nerve and diplopia due to sixth
cranial nerve palsy. It is associated with disease at the apex of the
petrous temporal bone where the abducens nerve is closely related
to the trigeminal nerve. Facial nerve palsy and deafness (VIII nerve
palsy) is also considered to be a part of this syndrome.
Causes includes:
Inflammation (petrositis, possibly spreading from a local infection
such as otitis or mastoiditis)
Tumors ( cholesteatoma, chordoma, meningioma, nasopharyngeal
carcinoma, metastatic disease)
Skull base fracture
   912. Singapore ear is
    a) Hypertrophy of sweat glands

    b) Hypertrophy of sebaceous glands

    c) Otitis externa

    d) Excoriation of external ear skin



   Correct Answer - C
   Ans. is 'c' i.e, Otitis externa [Ref Clinical ENT 5th/e p. 223]
   Excessive moisture is an important predisposing factor for otitis
   externa as excessive moisture elevates the pH and removes
   protective cerumen. Therefore, humidity and hot climate predispose
   to otitis externa. Hence otitis externa is also known as :-
1. Singapore ear (where climate is hot and humid)
2. Swimmer's ear
3. Telephonist's ear (telephonists who require inserts in their ear have
   excessive moisture due to sweating).
913. All of the following are true about
     malignant otitis externa except:
 a) ESR is used for follow up after treatment

 b) Granulation tissues are seen on superior wall of the external
    auditory canal

 c) Severe hearing loss is the chief presenting complaint

 d) Pseudomonas is the most common cause



Correct Answer - C
Ans. c. Severe hearing loss is the chief presenting complaint
Severe hearing loss is not the chief presenting complaint malignant
otitis externa.
Malignant Otitis Externa:
Characterized by granulation tissue in external auditory canal at the
junction of bone and cartilage.
MC organismz Pseudomonas aeruginosa
ESR is raised, used for follow up of treatment
914. A diabetic patient presents with foul
     smelling ear discharge, fever and severe
     pain in the ear. On examination there is
     thick yellow coloured discharge from the
     ear and granulation tissue in the canal.
     Which of the following is the appropriate
     management for this patient?
 a) Surgical debridement

 b) Antibiotic therapy

 c) Cryotherapy

 d) Laser removal of granulation tissue



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Antibiotic therapy [Ref Dhingra 6th/e p. 52]
The patient described in the question most likely has malignant otitis
externa.
So the treatment of choice is anti - pseudomonal antibiotics.
Extensive surgical debridement once an important part of the
treatment is now rarely needed
   915. Topodiagnosis of facial nerve has all the
        tests except
    a) Schirmer test

    b) Bing test

    c) Taste test

    d) Salivary flow test



   Correct Answer - B
   Ans. is 'b' i.e., Bing test [Ref Dhingra 6th/e p. 98]
   The following tests are useful in finding the site of lesion in paralysis
   of lower motor neuron.
1. Schirmer test : It compares lacrimation of the two sides. A strip of
   filter paper is hooked in the lower fornix of each eye and the amount
   of wetting of strip measured. Decreased lacrimation indicates lesion
   proximal to the geniculate gan- glion as the secretomotor fibres to
   lacrimal gland leave at the geniculate ganglion via greater superficial
   petrosal nerve.
2. Stapedial reflex : Stapedial reflex is lost in lesions above the nerve
   to stapedius. It is tested by tympanometry.
3. Taste test : It can be measured by a drop of salt or sugar solution
   placed on one side of the protruded tongue, or by electrogustometry.
   Impairment of taste indicates lesion above the chorda tympani.
4. Submandibular salivary flow test : It also measures func- tion of
   chorda tympani. Polythene tubes are passed into both Wharton
   ducts and drops of saliva counted during one minute period.
   Decreased salivation shows injury above the chorda.
   916. Which of the following is the function of
        tensor tympani muscle?
    a) Dampen very loud sound

    b) Tenses tympanic membrane

    c) Tenses pharyngotympanic tube

    d) Prevent noise trauma to the inner ear



   Correct Answer - B
   Ans. is 'b' i.e., Tenses tympanic membrane [Ref Dhingra 6"/e p.
   8]
   Normal opening of the eustachian tube equalizes atmospheric
   pressure in the middle ear; closing of the Eustachian tube protects
   the middle ear from unwanted pressure fluctuations and loud
   sounds.
   The muscles of the eustachian tube system help to open and close
   the tube, thus allowing it to perform its function.
   The muscles are :?
1. Tensor veli palatini (tensor palatini) :- Contraction of this muscle
   during swallowing, yawning and sneezing opens the tube. Defective
   function of this muscle in cleft palate results in eustachian tube
   dysfunction.
2. Tensor tympani :- Tensonises the tympanic membrane.
3. Levator veli palatini :- Sometimes, it also helps to open the tube,
   however it is usually considered as a velopharyngeal valve muscle
   only.
4. Salpingopharyngeus :- Its functional significance is questionable.
   917. True about serous otitis media are all
        except ?
    a) Also called glue ear

    b) Affect school going children

    c) Type C tympanogram

    d) Fluid in middle ear



   Correct Answer - C
   Ans. is `c' i.e., Type C tympanogram
   Serous otitis media
   Serous otitis media (SOM) has many synonyms : Serous otitis
   media, otitis media with effusion, glue ear, non-suppurative otitis
   media, mucoid otitis media, silent otitis media. SOM is an insidious
   condition in which there is thick or sticky non-purulent fluid behind
   the eardrum in the middle ear, but there is no ear infection, i.e.,
   effusion of middle ear without infection. Fluid in the middle ear is
   sterile. SOM occurs most commonly in school going children and
   SOM is the commonest cause of childhood hearing loss.
   Etiopathogenesis
   1. Eustachian tube dysfunction
   Eustachian tube dysfunction, coupled with recurrent upper
   respiratory tract infection is the most important factor in the
   development of SOM. Normally eustachian tube helps to drain fluids
   to prevent them from building up in the ear. In Eustachian tube
   dysfunction, it is unable to drain the fluid. Following can cause
   Eustachian tube block :-
1. Respiratory tract infection :- Adenoid, rhinitis, tonsillitis, sinusitis.
2. Allergies
3. Benign and malignant tumor of nasopharynx.
2. Unresolved otitis media
Inadequate antibiotic therapy in acute suppurative otitis media may
inactivate infection but fails to resolve it completely. Low grade
infection lingers on and acts as stimulus for mucosa to secrete more
fluid.
Clinical features
Unlike children with an ear infection (ASOM), children with SOM do
not act sick. o The only presenting symptom may be hearing loss
with fullness in ear.
Otoscopic finding of SOM
Air bubbles on the surface of ear drum
Fluid behind the eardrum.
Dullness of the eardrum when a light is used, with loss of light reflex.
o Eardrum may appear yellow, grey or bluish in colour.
Retracted eardrum with decreased mobility
Tympanometry shows type B tympanogram.
918. Pink reflex through intact tympanic
     membrane in active otosclerosis is
     known as
 a) Schwabach's sign

 b) Schwartz sign

 c) Lyre's sign

 d) Chvostek's sign



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Schwartz sign [Ref Dhingra 5th/e p. 98; Current
otolaryngology 2nd/e p. 674]
A reddish hue / Flammingo pink may be seen on the
promontory and oval window niche owing to the prominent
vascularity associated with an otospongiotic focus. This is k/a
Schwartz sign.
Schwartz sign is a pink reflex, seen through intact tympanic
membrane, in the area of oval window. It indicates active
otosclerosis usually during pregnancy.
Lyre's sign is splaying apart of internal and external carotid arteries
on angiogram in cases of carotid body tumour of the neck.
Chvostek's sign seen in hypocalcaemia as after total thyroidectomy
where parathyroids have also been removed. Tapping over the
distribution of facial nerve produces a twitch.
919. SADE classification classifies
 a) Retraction of tympanic membrane

 b) Extension of Glomus tumor

 c) Mortality after heart disease during pregnancy

 d) Extent of CSF rhinorrhea



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Retraction of tympanic membrane [Ref Basic
Clinical Radiobiology 5th/e p. 942]
Sade's classification of retraction of the pars tensa of the tympanic
membrane defined two types of retraction and classified each on an
ordinal scale :?
1. Atelectasis, defined as diffuse 'retraction of the tympanic
membrane towards the promontorium'.
2. Retraction pocket, defined as focal 'retraction of the pars tensa
towards or into the attic'
920. A 10 year old child presents with non
     foul purulent smelling discharge, which
     is painless. Patient reports that he is able
     to hear better in the presence of
     discharge than when the ear is dry. The
     most probable diagnosis is
 a) CSOM

 b) Serous otitis media

 c) Cholesteatoma

 d) Mastoiditis



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., CSOM [Ref Dhingra 6th /e p. 68]
Clinical features of CSOM
Profuse mucopurulant discharge which is not foul smelling, i.e., non
foul smelling discharge .
Hearing loss (conductive type). If sensorineural component also
occurs (i.e., mixed type), it arouses the suspician of toxic deafness.
Sometimes, patient reports a paradoxical effect, i.e., hears better in
the presence of discharge than when the ear is dry. This is due to
round window shielding effect produced by discharge which helps to
maintain phase differential.
There is no pain, if it occurs it is due to associated otitis externa not
due to otitis media.
Since the infected area is open at both ends, discharge does not
accumulate in the middle ear cavity.
Ossicular chain is mostly uninvolved, if involved only long process of
incus is involved.
   921. Treatment of central safe perforation of
        tympanic membrane includes all except
    a) Aural toilet

    b) Ear drops

    c) Avulsion of aural polyp

    d) Myringoplasty



   Correct Answer - C
   Ans. is 'c' i.e., Avulsion of aural polyp [Ref Dhingra 6th le p. 72]
   An aural polyp should never be avulsed as it may be arising from the
   stapes, facial nerve or horizontal canal and thus lead to facial
   paralysis or labyrinthitis.
   Treatment
   The aim is to control infection and eliminate ear discharge and at a
   later stage to correct the hearing loss by surgical means.
1. Aural toilet : Remove all discharge and debris from the ear. It can be
   done by dry mopping with absorbent cotton buds, suction clearance
   under microscope or irrigation (not forceful syringing) with sterile
   normal saline. Ear must be dried after irrigation.
2. Ear drops : Antibiotic ear drops containing neomycin, polymyxin,
   chloromycetin or gentamicin are used. They are combined with
   steroids, which have local antiinflammatory effect.
3. Systemic antibiotics : They are useful in acute exacerbation of
   chronically infected ear, otherwise role of systemic antibiotics in the
   treatment of CSOM is limited.
4. Precautions : Patients are instructed to keep water out of the ear
   during bathing, swimming and hair wash. Rubber inserts can be
   used. Hard nose blowing can also push the infection from
   nasopharynx to middle ear and should be avoided.
5. Treatment of contributory causes : Attention should be paid to treat
   concomitantly infected tonsils, adenoids, maxillary antrum and nasal
   allergy.
6. Surgical treatment : Aural polyp or granulations, if present, should be
   removed before local treatment with antibiotics. It will facilitate ear
   toilet and permit ear drops to be used effectively.
7. Reconstructive surgery: Once ear is dry, myringoplasty with or
   without ossicular reconstruction can be done to restore hearing.
   Closure of perforation will also check repeated infection from the
   external canal.
922. Korner's septum is seen in ?
 a) Petrosquamous suture

 b) Temporosquamous suture

 c) Petromastoid suture

 d) Frontozygomatic suture



Correct Answer - A
Mastoid develops from squamous and petrous bone.
Korner's septum is persistence of petrosquamous suture in the form
of a bony plate.
Korner's septum is surgically important as it may cause difficulty in
locating the antrum and the deeper (ells, and thus lead to incomplete
removal of disease at mastoidectomy. Mastoid antrum cannot be
reached unless the
Korners septum has been removed.
923. Agger nasi is
 a) Mucosal flap covering the nasolacrimal duct

 b) Opening of the sinuses

 c) Depression in front of middle turbinate

 d) Elevation anterior to middle turbinate



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Elevation anterior to middle turbinate [Ref
Dhingra 5thie p. 150; Tuli 1"/e p. 135]
Atrium is a shallow depression in front of the middle turbinate. Agger
nasi is an elevation just anterior to the attachement of middle
turbinate.
924. Quadrungular septum is seen in which of
     the following?
 a) Larynx

 b) Nose

 c) Cranium

 d) Palate



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Nose [Ref Dhingra 5th/e p. 150]
"Cartilage of the septum, also known as the quandragular cartilage
because it is roughly quadrilateral in shape - separates the nostrils".
925. Nasal vestibule is
 a) Lateral part of nasal cavity

 b) Antero - inferior part of nasal cavity

 c) Supero - medial part of nose

 d) Posterior aperture of nose



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Antero - inferior part of nasal cavity[Ref
Otolaryngology Basic Science & Clinical Review by Van De
Water p. 462]
Internal nose has following parts :
Nasal cavity proper:- Internal nose is divided into right and left nasal
cavities by nasal septum. Each nasal cavity communicates with the
exterior through naris or nostrils and with nasopharynx through
posterior nasal aperture or posterior nares or choana.
Vestibule of nose :- Anterior and inferior part of the nasal cavity is
lined by skin and is called vestibule of nose. It contains sebaceous
glands, hair follicles and the hair called vibrissae.
926. Which of the following terms is used to
     describe the most prominent point of
     nasal tip?
 a) Pronasale

 b) Alare

 c) Nasion

 d) Columella apex



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Pronasale [Ref Handbook of anthropometry:
Physical measures of human form in health and diseases, by
Victor R. Preedy, p. 922]
Pronasale : Most prominent point on the nasal tip.
Alare : The point where the nasal blade (Ala nasi) extends the
farthest out.
Columella apex : The most anterior or the highest point on the
columella crest at the apex of the nostril.
Nasion : The point in the midline of both the anatomic nose and the
nasoanterioral suture
927. Epistaxis after ligating external carotid
     artery is due to which vessel?
 a) Anterior ethmoidal artery

 b) Superior labial artery

 c) Sphenopalatine artery

 d) Greater palatine artery



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Anterior ethmoidal artery [Ref Dhingra 5thie p.
190]
Since external carotid artery is ligated, the bleeding comes from
branches of the internal carotid artery.
Anterior ethmoidal artery, a branch of ophthalmic artery, which is a
branch of internal carotid artery, is a constituent of the blood supply
of the Little's area of the nasal septum.
Blood supply of nasal septum
i) Internal carotid system
Anterior ethmoidal artery
Branches of ophthalmic artery
Posterior ethmoidal artery
ii) External Carotid System
Sphenopalatine artery (branch of maxillary artery) gives
nasopalatine and posterior medial nasal branches.
Septal branch of greater palatine artery (Br. of maxillary artery).
Septal branch of superior labial artery (Br. of facial artery)
928. Killian's polyp is a/an
 a) Antrochoanal polyp

 b) Ethmoidal polyp

 c) Frontal polyp

 d) Maxillary polyp



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Antrochoanal polyp [Ref Dhingra 5th/e p. 186;
Essential otolaryngology 2"1/e p. 660]
Nasal polyps are of two types :?
Antrochoanal :- This is usually solitary and arises from maxillary
sinus and grows backward in the nose towards the choana (in
contrast to ethmoidal polyps which tend to grow forward). The
Antrochoanal polyp was first described by Gustain killians, therefore
the name given to it was killian's polyp.
Ethmoidal :- These are multiple, bilateral and arise from etmoidal
sinuses and tend to protrude forwards.
929. Which of the following is the
     predisposing factor for ethmoidal
     carcinoma
 a) Smoking

 b) Alcohol

 c) Chronic infection

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Smoking [Ref Diseases of ENT by Bansal p. 363]
Risk factors for squamous cell carcinoma of the paranasal
sinuses :-
Smoking , Mustard gas, Nickel and chromium plating industry,
Isopropyl oil
Leather industry , Wood dust exposure (adenocarcinoma of
ethmoid), Polycyclic volatile hydrocarbons
930. Most common sinus predisposed to
     malignancy which of the following?
 a) Ethmoid

 b) Maxillary

 c) Frontal

 d) Sphenoid



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Maxillary [Ref Dhingra 5thie p. 219]
The majority of paranasal sinus malignancies (50-80%) originate
within the maxillary sinus antrum.
Sinuses and various conditions in which sinuses are affected in
descending order of frequency
931. Most common benign tumor of paranasal
     sinuses?
 a) Papilloma

 b) Osteoma

 c) Warts

 d) Fibroma



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Osteoma [Ref Logan Turner 8`h/e p. 89]
Osteoma of the frontal sinus - Most common benign tumour arising
in the nasal sinuses.
The osteoma arises from the floor of the frontal sinus near the
midline.
932. Rhinolith can cause
 a) Nasal obstruction

 b) Epistaxis

 c) Epiphora

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - D
A rhinolith is a calculus present in the nasal cavity.
The word is derived from the roots rhino- and -lith, literally meaning
"nose stone".
A rhinolith usually forms around the nucleus of a small exogenous
foreign body, blood clot or secretion by slow deposition of calcium
and magnesium salts.
Over a period of time, they grow into large irregular masses that fill
the nasal cavity.
They may cause pressure necrosis of the nasal septum or
lateral wall of nose leading to nasal obstruction, epistaxis,
headache, sinusitis and epiphora.
933. What is a Rhinolith:
 a) Foreign body in nose

 b) Stone in nose

 c) Deposition of calcium around foreign body in nose

 d) Misnomer



Correct Answer - C
Rhinoliths are calcareous masses which result due to deposition of
salts-like calcium and magnesium carbonates and phosphates
around the nucleus of a foreign body.
934. Treatment of nasal bone fracture
     includes all except
 a) Hematoma drainage

 b) Topical vasoconstrictor

 c) Closed reduction

 d) Immediate rhinoplasty



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Immediate rhinoplasty [Ref Scott Brown 7th/e p.
1612]
Treatment of nasal injuries
After ensuring patency of airway, adequate ventilation and overall
stability of patient, attention to the nasal injuries should be given.
Standard therapy is to perform closed reduction or open reducation
between 3 and 7 days, and upto 2 weeks. This is because :
Most of the patients (-70-80%) do not require any active treatment,
as many do not have a nasal fracture and those that do, the fracture
is not displaced. Soft tissue swelling can produce the misleading
appearance of a deformity which disapears as the swelling subsides.
Such patients require only reassurance & topical vasoconstrictors to
alleviate congestion and obstructive symptoms. A re-examination
should be carried out after 5 days, if there is uncertainity about the
need for reduction.
A large number of patients will have a preexisting nasal deformity
caused by a previous incident. Patients that fall in this category are
advised to consider a formal rhinoplasty when everything has settled
down some months later.
Immediate surgical intervention in acute phase is indicated : ?
Severe deformity:- Septal hematoma causing nasal obstruction
935. All of the following are true about
     parapharyngeal abscess except?
 a) Mastoid process divides the space into anterior and posterior

 b) Also known as pharyngomaxillary space infection

 c) Tonsil is pushed medially

 d) Occurs after tooth extraction



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Mastoid process divides the space into anterior
and posterior [Ref Dhingra V/e p. 281]
Styloid process and the muscles attached to it divide the
parapharyngeal space into anterior and posterior compartments, not
mastoid process.
936. Trismus in parapharyngeal abscess is
     due to spasm of:
 a) Masseter muscle

 b) Medial pterygoid

 c) Lateral pterygoid

 d) Temporalis



Correct Answer - B
Styloid process divides the pharynx into anterior and posterior
compartment.
Trismus occurs in infection of anterior compartment whereas
torticollis (due to spasm of paravertebral muscles) occurs in the
infection of posterior compartment.
937. Regarding adenoids true is/are:
 a) There is failure to thrive

 b) Mouth breathing is seen

 c) CT scan should be done to assess size

 d) a and b



Correct Answer - D
High arched palate and mouth breathing are features of
hypertrophied adenoids which leads to adenoid facies
In adenoids as a consequence of recurrent nasal obstruction and
URTI, child develops failure to thrive
Size of adenoids may well be assessed using lateral radiograph of
nasopharynx, and CT scan is not necessary
Adenoids, also known as nasopharyngeal tonsils, are subepithelial
collection of lymphoid tissue at the junction of roof and posterior wall
of nasopharynx.
938. Lining epithelium of vocal cord is
 a) Stratified squamous epithelium

 b) Non stratified squamous epithelium

 c) Ciliated columnar epithelium

 d) Non ciliated columnar epithelium



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Stratified squamous epithelium [Ref Dhingra Vie
p. 300]
Vocal cords along with the upper part of the vestibule is the only part
of laryngeal mucous membrane which is lined by epithelium of
stratified squamous type. Elsewhere in the larynx epithelium of the
mucous membrane is ciliated columnar type.
939. Select correct statements about Ca
     larynx:
a) Glottic Ca is the most common

b) Supraglottic ca has best prognosis

c) Lymphatic spread is the most common in subglottic Ca

d) All



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is. A. Glottic Ca is the most common
940. Which of the following sites of Ca larynx
     has the best prognosis?
 a) Glottic

 b) Supraglottis

 c) Subgottis

 d) All have poor prognosis



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e.,Glottic [Ref Dhingra 5th/e p. 326]
Laryngeal carcinoma:-
Cancer        Prognosis
Glottis       Good
SupraglottisPoor
Subglottis Worst
941. Laser used in tracheal neoplasm is
 a) Argon

 b) KTP - 532

 c) CO2

 d) Nd - YAG



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., CO2 [Ref Dhingra 5th/e p. 315]
Four types of laser are generally used in ENT surgery :
Argon
KTP - 532 (Potassium titanyl phosphate);
Nd : YAG (Neodyminum - yttrium aluminium garnet);
CO2
The carbon dioxide (CO) laser is the most common laser used for
tracheal neoplasm.
942. Most common site of distant metastasis
     from Ca larynx
 a) Lymph nodes

 b) Lung

 c) Brain

 d) Bone



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Lung [Ref Clinical Otorhinolaryngology
yd /el). 931]
Distant metastasis is seen much less frequently. The most
commonly affected sites for distant metastases are lungs (66%);
bone (22%), liver (10%), mediastinum and bone marrow.
943. All the following are true about Laryngeal
     carcinoma except:
 a) More common in females

 b) Common in patients over 40 years of age

 c) After laryngectomy, esophageal voice can be used

 d) b and c



Correct Answer - A
Cancer Larynx
Most common histological type of laryngeal Ca - Squamous cell
carcinoma (seen in 90% cases)
It is more common in males.
Male: Female ratio is 4: 1
Most common age = 60-70 years.
944. A patient presents with Ca larynx
     involving left false cord, left arytenoid
     and left aryepiglottic fold with bilateral
     mobile true cords. The treatment of
     choice in this patient is which of the
     following?
 a) Vertical hemilarygectomy

 b) Horizontal partial hemilaryngectomy

 c) Total laryngectomy

 d) Radiotherapy followed by chemotherapy



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Horizontal partial hemilaryngectomy [Ref Dhingra
4th/e p. 284]
Involvement of unilateral false cord, aryepiglottic folds and
arytenoids with mobile cord suggests supraglottic cancer in T2 stage
(more than one subsites of supraglottis are involved).
   945. In recurrent laryngeal nerve palsy which
        muscle keeps vocal cord in median
        position?
    a) Posterior cricoarytenoid

    b) Cricothyroid

    c) Vocalis

    d) All of the above



   Correct Answer - B
   Ans. is 'b' i.e., Cricothyroid [Ref Dhingra 5th/e p. 300]
   Recurrent laryngeal nerve paralysis
   Recurrent laryngeal nerve supplies : ?
1. All intrinsic muscles of the larynx except cricothyroid.
2. Sensory supply to larynx below vocal cords.
   So, paralysis of recurrent laryngeal nerve causes : ?
1. Paralysis of all intrinsic muscles including all adductors (except for
   cricothyroid) and all abductors.
2. Anaesthesia below the level of vocal cord.
   Though, there is paralysis of both adductors (except cricothyroid)
   and abductors, the manifestations are mainly due to paralysis of
   abductors.
946.
Esophagus is constricted at 4 anatomic locations. Narrowest part of esophagus lies
at which of the following constriction?

 a) At the level of cricopharyngeal sphincter

 b) At the crossing of aortic arch

 c) At the crossing of left bronchus

 d) At the level of opening in the diaphragm



Correct Answer - A
Narrowest part of esophagus is at its commencement at the cricopharyngeal sphincter
which is 15cm from the incisor teeth.

Other sites of esophagus where it is slightly constricted includes:
Crossing by the aortic arch which is 22cm from the teeth.
Crossing by the left principal bronchus which is 27cm from the teeth
At the opening in the diaphragm which is 38cm from the teeth
947.
Food particles mostly get obstructed in which
part of esophagus -
 a) Cricopharyngeal sphincter

 b) Crossing of arch of aorta

 c) Cardiac end

 d) None of the above



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e, Cricopharyngeal sphincter [Ref: Dhingra 6thie p.
349]
By far the commonest site is at or just below the cricopharyngeal
sphincter. Flat objects like coins are held up at the sphincter while
others are held in the upper oesophagus just below the sphincter
due to poor peristalsis.
948. True regarding traction diverticuli of
     esophagus is all except
 a) Does not empty completely

 b) Triangular appearance

 c) Contains all layers

 d) Maintains elastic recoil



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Does not empty completely [Ref The Esophagus
by Richter p. 143]
                                                Pulsion Diverticula
                                                False diverticula
             Traction Diverticula               Ususally only mucosal
             True diverticula                   outpouchings Distal
Type
             Lined by all layers                esophagus
Layers
             Mid esophagus                      Associated with
Location
             Scarring from TB or                dysmotility
Associated
             histoplasmosis involving perihilar Rounded
Shape
             or subcarinal lymph nodes          outpouchings
Emptying
             Triangular or tented               Do not empty
             Tends to empty contents            completely
                                                Epiphrenic diverticula,
                                                Zenker's diverticula
949. Simple mastoidectomy is done in:
 a) Acute mastoiditis

 b) Cholesteatoma

 c) Coalescent mastoiditis

 d) Localized chronic otitis media



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is. C. Coalescent mastoiditis
950. Radical mastoidectomy is done for:
 a) ASOM

 b) CSOM

 c) Atticoantral cholesteotoma

 d) Acute mastoiditis



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is. C. Atticoantral cholesteotoma
951. Sluder's neuralgia is also called as
 a) Anterior ethmoidal syndrome

 b) Posterior ethmoidal syndrome

 c) Trotter syndrome

 d) Lermoyez syndrome



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Anterior ethmoidal syndrome [Ref Dhingra 6th/e
p. 450]
Sluder's neuralgia
It is also called anterior ethmoidal syndrome.
It is said to originate from the middle turbinate pressing on the nasal
septum.
It is characterized by pain around the bridge of the nose radiating
into forehead.
Treatment Anatomical correction relieves the pain.
952. Styloid process is derived from ?
 a) 1st arch

 b) 2nd arch

 c) 3rd arch

 d) 4th arch



Correct Answer - B
Styloid process is derived from 2nd pharyngeal arch.
953. Most common cause of singer's nodule
     is ?
 a) Infection

 b) Allergy

 c) Vocal abuse

 d) None



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Vocal abuse
Vocal nodule (singer's or screamer's nodule)
Vocal nodule are benign noneoplastic growth on free edge of both
the vocal cords at the junction of anterior 1/ 3 with posterior 2/3.
This area is particularly vulnerable to trauma as this is the area of
maximum vibration of the cord.
The major cause is voice abuse, therefore it is most commonly seen
in singers, actors, teachers, and howkers.
Hoarseness is the most common symptom. Vocal fatigue and pain in
neck on prolonged phonation are other symptoms.
Treatment
Early cases of vocal nodules can be treated conservatively by
educating the patient in proper use of voice. Many nodules
especially in children, disappear with this treatment.
Surgery is required for large nodules or long standing nodules in
adults. Microscopic (micorlaryngoscopic) excision is the treatment of
choice.
954. Most common tumor of oropharynx is
 a) Squamous cell carcinoma

 b) Adenocarcinoma

 c) Melanoma

 d) Salivary gland tumors



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Squamous cell carcinoma [Ref Abeloff's Clinical
Oncology 6" le p. 1059]
90 – 95% of tumors in the oropharynx are squamous cell
carcinomas, whereas others are minor salivary gland tumors,
melanomas.
The most common manifesting symptoms are a nontender neck
mass, dysphagia, otalgia, or a "hot potato" voice.
955. Investigation of choice for diagnosing
     submandibular gland duct stones is
 a) Ultrasound

 b) X-ray of floor of mouth

 c) Sialography

 d) Sialoendoscopy



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Ultrasound [Ref Churchill's pocket book of
surgery p. 133] Investigations for salivary gland stones
Ultrasound is the investigation of choice – as it permits assessment
of the gland, duct system and calculus which usually has an acoustic
shadow.
'Floor of mouth' radiographic view for submandibular calculi in
Wharton's duct where ultrasound findings are equivocal or
unavailable.
If no stone is seen, consider sialography.
Sialoendoscopy is increasingly used in the diagnosis and treatment
of salivary gland outflow obstructive conditions.
  956. Deafness in a case of Paget's disease is
       due to
    a) Retraction pockets

    b) Otitis

    c) Eight nerve involvement

    d) Endolymphatic hydrops



   Correct Answer - C
   Ans. is 'c' i.e., Eight nerve involvement [Refer Neurology
   consult 5"/e p. 866]
   Cranial nerve compression is the usual cause of deafness.
   Complications of Paget's disease
   Following complications can occur in Paget's disease : -
1. Fracture : Are common in weight bearing bones
2. Cranial nerve compression :- May cause impaired vision, facial
   palsy, trigeminal neuralgia or deafness.
3. Otosclerosis : - Another cause of deafness in Paget's disease.
4. Spinal canal stenosis and nerve root compression
5. High output cardiac failure
6. Osteoarthritis : of Hip and knee
7. Rarely osteosarcoma
957. Membrane incised during
     hemilaryngectomy is
 a) Thyrohyoid

 b) Cricothyroid

 c) Aryepiglottic

 d) Infralaryngeal



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Cricothyroid [Ref Dhingra ele p. 310]
Indications and containdications
Ideal for bulky lesions of the membranous true vocal cord
Normal or slightly impaired vocal cord mobility
No involvement of the supraglottis
958. Snellen's chart is used to test:
 a) Vision

 b) Refraction

 c) Presbyopia

 d) Colour blindness



Correct Answer - A
Ans. Vision
959. In Snellen's chart, eye subtends an angle
     of how many minutes with letters on
     Snellen's chart?
 a) 1 min of arc

 b) 5 min of arc

 c) 10 min of arc

 d) 15 min of arc



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., 5 min of arc
Indications:
To provide a baseline recording of visual acuity (VA)
To aid examination and diagnosis of eye disease or refractive error
For medico-legal reasons
Equipment:
Multi-letter Snellen chart
E or C Snellen chart or a chart with illustrations for patients who
cannot read or speak
Plain occluder (not essential)
Pinhole occluder
Torch or flashlight
Patient's documentation
Procedure:
At the given distance, each letter subtends an angle of 5 min at the
nodal point of the eye
Snellen chart is used for distant vision.
The patient should read the chart at a distance of 6 m.
Principle:
lt consists of letters arranged in lines, with progressively diminishing
size.
Each letter subtends an angle of 5 minutes at the nodal point of an
eye when viewed from its respective distance
Each letter is so constructed that the width (of each stroke) subtends
an angle of 1 minute = MAR.




Interpretation:
Normal visual acuity for far is 6/5
Best visual acuity for far is 6/3
Minimum recordable VA on Snellen's chart is 1/60.
Snellen's chart:
960. Placido disc is used for diagnosing which of the following condition?
 a) Uveitis

 b) Keratoconus

 c) Retinoblastoma

 d) Retinal detachment



Correct Answer - B
Placido disc examination is used to diagnose keratoconus. In a case of keratoconus,
placido disc examination shows irregularities of the circles.

Placido’s keratoscopic disc: It is a disc painted with alternating black and white circles. It
may be used to assess the smoothness and curvature of corneal surface. Normally, on
looking through the hole in the center of disc a uniform sharp image of the circle is seen on
the cornea. Distortion of the circles occur when irregularities are present on the corneal
surface.

Ref: Comprehensive Ophthalmology By AK Khurana, 4th edn, page 119
961. Listers perimeter is used for
 a) Kinetic Visual field testing

 b) Static Visual field testing

 c) Both kinetic and static visual testing

 d) None of these



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Kinetic Visual field testing [Ref Kanski's 8th/e
chapter 10, p. 325]
Static perimetry: A method of assessing fields, usually automated, in
which the location of a stimulus remains fixed, with intensity
increased until it is seen by the subject (threshold is reached) or
decreased until it is no longer detected.
Kinetic (dynamic) perimetry is now much less commonly performed
than static perimetry. A stimulus of constant intensity is moved from
a non-seeing area to a seeing area at a standardized speed until it is
perceived, and the point of perception is recorded on a chart; points
from different meridia are joined to plot an isopter for that stimulus
intensity.
Stimuli of different intensities are used to produce a contour map of
the visual field. Kinetic perimetry can be performed by means of a
manual (Goldmann) or an automated perimeter if the latter is
equipped with an appropriate software program.
  962. What is the type of Goldman tonometry?
    a) Applanation Tonometry

    b) Dynamic countour tonometry

    c) Rebound tonometry

    d) Impression tonometry



   Correct Answer - A
   Ans. is 'a' i.e., Applanation Tonometry [Ref Anatomy &
   physiology of eye 2"1/e p. 79]
   Measurement of intraocular pressure (10P)
   Measurement of IOP is done by :?
   A) Manometry :- It is the only direct measure of IOP.
   B) Tonometry :- It is an indirect method of measurement of IOP.
   Following types of tonometers are there :-
1. Indentation (impression) tonometer :- These are the most commonly
   used tonometers. Example is Schiotz tonometer.
2. Applanation tonometer Goldmann applanation tonometer is the most
   accurate tonometer. Other types of applanation tonometers are
   perkin's tonometer, pneumatic tonometer, air-puff tonometer, Pulse
   air tonometer, Tono pen
963. Spasm of accommodation mimics
 a) Myopia

 b) Hypermetropia

 c) Amblyopia

 d) Presbiopia



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e.,Myopia [Ref Khurana ilth/e p. 42]
Pseudomyopia
Spasm of accommodation occurs due to excessive contraction of
the ciliary muscles.
This makes the zonules loose and hence the lens becomes more
convex.
This leads to the image be formed in front of the retina therebt
mimicking myopia.
This is called pseudomyopia.
964. Subretinal haemorrhage at the macula in
     myopia is known as?
 a) Lacquer cracks

 b) Foster Fuchs spot

 c) Staphyloma

 d) Macular retinoschisis



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Foster fuchs spot
Degenerative myopia:
Refractive error may increase upto 20-25D with degenerative
changes in eye.
Temporal myopic crescent is a feature of pathological/degenerative
myopia.
It is a white crescent at the temporal border of the disc.
Some of the most typical features of degenerative myopia are:
Vitreous liquefaction and posterior vitreous detachment
Peripapillary atrophy appearing as temporal choroidal or scleral
crescents or rings around the optic disc
Lattice degeneration in the peripheral retina
Tilting or malinsertion of the optic disc, usually associated with
myopic conus
Thinning of the retinal pigment epithelium with resulting atrophic
appearance of the fundus
Ectasia of the sclera posteriorly (posterior staphyloma)
Breaks in Bruch’s membrane and choriocapillaris, resulting in lines
across the fundus called “lacquer cracks”
Foster Fuch’s spot in the macular area.
965. Dispersive prism functions for
 a) Splitting light into different wavelengths

 b) Reflecting light

 c) Polarizing light

 d) None



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Splitting light into different wavelengths [Ref
"The Discovery of the Spectrum of Light".]
"Prisms may be used for polarising and reflecting light but dispersive
prisms like the commonly used triangular prism split the light into
different colours based on wavelengths"
In optics, a prism is a transparent optical element with flat, polished
surfaces that refract light. At least two of the flat surfaces must have
an angle between them. The exact angles between the surfaces
depend on the application. The traditional geometrical shape is that
of a triangular prism with a triangular base and rectangular sides.
Light changes speed as it moves from one medium to another (for
example, from air into the glass of the prism). This speed change
causes the light to be refracted and to enter the new medium at a
different angle (Huygens principle). The degree of bending of the
light's path depends on the angle that the incident beam of light
makes with the surface, and on the ratio between the refractive
indices of the two media (Snell's law). The refractive index of many
materials (such as glass) varies with the wavelength or color of the
light used, a phenomenon known as dispersion. This causes light of
different colors to be refracted differently and to leave the prism at
different angles, creating an effect similar to a rainbow.
966. Goblet cells are seen in -
 a) Cornea

 b) Conjunctiva

 c) Retina

 d) Vitreous



Correct Answer - B
Answer B. Conjunctiva
Goblet cells within the conjunctival epithelium are
specialized cells that secrete mucins onto the surface of the
eye.
Histology of conjunctiva
The epithelium is non-keratinizing and around five cell-layers
deep. Mucin-secreting goblet cells are located within the epithelium,
and they are most dense inferonasally (nasal > inferior) and in
the fornices.
The stroma (substantia propria) consists of richly vascularized, loose
connective tissue. The accessory lacrimal glands of Krause and
Wolfring are located deep within the stroma.
Conjunctiva-associated lymphoid tissue (CALT) is critical in the
initiation and regulation of ocular surface immune responses.
967. Schwalbe's ring corresponds to:
a) Corneal endothelium

b) Descemet's membrane

c) Schlemm's canal

d) Ciliary body



Correct Answer - B
Ans. Descemet's membrane
968. Corneal epithelial repair includes all of
     the following phases except
 a) Cell proliferation

 b) Cell migration

 c) Cell adhesion

 d) Cell fusion



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Cell fusion [Ref Corneal Epithelial wound
healing: BJO 1994, 78; 401-408]
Corneal epithelial repair
The processes involved in the healing of corneal epithelial wounds
can be divided into three distinct components: cell migration, cell
proliferation, and cell adhesion.
All three components are part of a continuous process but the
contribution of each can vary depending on the size and depth of the
wound and nature of injury.
969. Conjunctival staining is done by all
     except
 a) Fluoroscein

 b) India ink

 c) Rose Bengal

 d) Lissamine



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., India ink [Ref Can J Ophthalmol. 2015
Aug;50(4):273-7. doi: 10.1016/j.jcjo.2015.05.007.]
Common dyes used for conjunctival staining : Rose Bengal,
Fluoroscein and Lissamine.
970. Treatment of mooren's ulcer is?
 a) Corneal graft

 b) Immunosuppressives

 c) Topical steroids

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - D
All of the above REF: Khurana 4th ed p. 110
MOOREN'S ULCER:
Severe inflammatory peripheral ulcerative keratitis , chronic
serpigenous or rodent ulcer
 Treatment:
1. Topical corticosteroids
2. Immunosuppressives with systemic steroids , e.g. cyclosporine
3. Soft contact lens
4. Lamellar or full thickness corneal grafting
971. Pseudogerontoxon is seen in
 a) Vernal keratopathy

 b) Choroidal melanoma

 c) Trachoma

 d) Retinoblastoma



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Vernal keratopathy [Ref Kanski 8'1* Chap. 5, p.
138]
972. A 50 year old male presents with
     cicatricial entopion of upper and lower
     eyelid. On eversion of upper eyelid,
     linear conjunctival scars - Arlt line are
     seen. What is the diagnosis?
 a) Trachoma

 b) Spring catarrah

 c) Ligneous conjunctivitis

 d) Parinaud oculoglandular syndrome



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e.,Trachoma [Ref Kanski 8th /e Chap. 5, p. 138]
Arlt line is a feature of trachoma.
Signs of Trachoma
Conjunctival signs :- Congestion, conjunctival follicles (boiled
sagograin like), Papillary hyperplasia, conjunctival scarring (Arles
line), concretion.
Corneal signs :- Superficial keratitis, Herbert follicles, Pannus,
Corneal ulcer, Herbert pits, Corneal opacity.
   973. Pain is out of proportion to signs in
        which corneal ulcer?
    a) Herpes simplex keratits

    b) Acanthamoeba keratitis

    c) Fungal keratitis

    d) Pneumococcal keratitis



   Correct Answer - B
   Ans. is 'b' i.e.,Acanthamoeba keratitis [Ref Kanski 8th le Chap. 6,
   p. 197]
   In human, acanthamoeba causes :- (i) Keratitis; (ii) Granulomatous
   encephalitis, (iii) Fulminant meningoencephalitis
   Patient presents with very severe pain (which is out of proportion to
   the degree of clinical signs), watering, photophobia, blurred vision
   and blepherospasm. On examination, following characteristic
   features are seen : ?
1. Initial lesions (Epithelial lesions) :- Initially the Acanthamoeba
   keratitis shows typical reticular pattern due to radial keratoneuritis
   (Radial perineuritis). At this stage it is commonly mistaken for herpes
   simplex keratitis because of pseudodentritic epithelial lesion
   (dentritic ulcer morphology).
2. Advanced cases (Stromal involvement) :- Over a period of weeks
   stromal signs develop with central or paracentral ring shaped lesion
   with stromal infiltrate and an overlying epithelial defect, ultimately
   presenting as ring abscess. There may be radial perineuritis,
   Wessely (inflammatory) ring and hypopyon.
974. Which of the following is not a feature of
     fungal corneal ulcer?
a) Fixed hypopyon

b) Ulcer with sloughing margins

c) Symptoms are more pronounced than signs

d) Fungal hyphae are seen on KOH mount



Correct Answer - C
Ans. c. Symptoms are more pronounced than signs
975. Oblate ellipsoid appearance of cornea is
     seen in which of the following
     conditions?
 a) Post myopic LASIK surgery

 b) With the rule astigmatism

 c) Bi-oblique astigmatism

 d) Oblique astigmatism



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Post myopic LASIK surgery [Ref Quality of
vision: Essential Optics for the cataract and refractive surgeon,
chap. 3, p. 30]
The cornea is a three dimensional prolate ellipsoid, like a bullet or a
tulip. It is steeper in the centre and flatter in the periphery.
After refractive surgeries like myopic LASIK, cornea is converted to
oblate ellipsoid, which is steeper in the periphery and flatter in the
centre.
976. Which of the following
     Glycosaminoglycans are not present in
     cornea
 a) Keratin sulfate

 b) Chondroitin sulfate

 c) Chondroitin

 d) Heparin sulfate



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Heparin sulfate [Ref Khurana Anatomy and
Physiology of Eyes, ?die, chapter 2, p. 26)
GAGs ( Glycosaminoglycans) or so called acid-
mucopolysaccharides represent 4-4.5% of the dry weight of the
cornea.
Cornea contains three major GAG fractions namely: Keratan sulfate
(50%), chondroitin sulfate (25%) and chondroitin (25%)-present
exclusively in cornea.
The GAG are present in the interfibrillar space of the corneal stroma
and account for the `stromal swelling pressure'(normal-60 mmHg) ie.
Its tendency to imbibe water and thus plays an important role in the
maintenance of corneal hydration level and transparency. An
abnormal accumulation of GAG occurs in the corneal stroma of the
patients affected by the inborn errors of GAG metabolism known as
mucopolysaccharidosis.
977. Iron deposition line at edge of pterygium
     on corneal epithelium is known as?
 a) Stocker's line

 b) KF Ring

 c) Fleischer ring

 d) Ferrys line



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Stocker's line [Ref: Khurana 4'5/e p. 80; Parson
21"/e p. 181; Yanoff & Ducker Ophthalmology yd le p
978. Gene for eye morphogenesis
 a) Pax-6

 b) BMP-4

 c) HOX-D13

 d) HOX-A13



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Pax-6
The Pax-6 gene locus is a transcription factor for various genes and
growth factors involved in eye formation.Pax-6 is a master control
gene for eye morphogenesis and encodes for Paired box protein
Pax-6 (also called aniridia type II protein or oculorhombin).
979. The percentage of atropine present in
     atropine drops as cycloplegic is:
 a) 0.5%

 b) 1%

 c) 4%

 d) 2%



Correct Answer - B
1%
980. Which order neuron is optic nerve in the
     visual pathway?
 a) First order

 b) Second order

 c) Third order

 d) None of these



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Second order [Ref Khurana 4th/e p. 286-289;
Concise textbook of physiology 2"/e p. 336]
Sensory organs → Photoreceptors (Rods & cones)
Neurons of first order → Axon of bipolar cells (in Retina)
Neurons of second order → Axons of ganglionic cell (Retina i.e.,
Optic disc, Optic nerve, Optic chiasma, optic tracts)
Neurons of third order → Axons from nerve cells in lateral geniculate
body (optic radiation)
981. Purkinje image test is used in
 a) Keratomoter

 b) Retinoscopy

 c) Optical coherence tomography

 d) Pachymeter



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e.,Pachymeter [Ref Elkington's clinical optics 3rd/e
chapter 14, p. 207]
Pachymetry is the measurement of corneal thickness. Pachymeters
employ either optical or ultrasound principles.
Optical pachymeters use the Purkinje-Sanson images formed by the
anterior and posterior surfaces of the cornea (images I and II) to
measure corneal thickness, and the Purkinje-Sanson images formed
by the posterior surface of the cornea and the anterior surface of the
lens (images II and III) to measure the depth of the anterior
chamber.
982.
Which of the following is not a part of uveal
 a) Iris

 b) Ciliary body

 c) Choroid

 d) Retina



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e.,Retina [Ref Khurana's 2"/e Chap. 3, p. 44]
Uveal tissue constitutes the middle vascular coat of the eyeball
(Inner coat is retina and outer coat is cornea & sclera). From anterior
to posterior it can be divided into three parts :- Iris, ciliary body and
choroid. Iris and anterior part (2 mm) of ciliary body(pars plicata) are
considered as anterior uveal tissues.
Posterior part (4mm) of ciliary body (pars plana) and adjacent
choroid are considered as intermediate uveal tissue. Choroid is
considered as posterior uveal tissue. The entire uveal tract is
developmentally, structurally and functionally one individual
structure.
983. All except one are true for Scleromalacia
     perforans
 a) It is non inflammatory scleritis

 b) It affects only males

 c) Perforation of the globe is extremely rare

 d) Vision is unaffected



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., It affects only males [Ref Kanski's Clinical
Ophthalmology 8"Ve chapter 8, p. 259]
Scleromalacia perforans
Scleromalacia perforans (5% of scleritis) is a specific type of
progressive scleral thinning without inflammation that typically
affects elderly women with longstanding rheumatoid arthritis, but has
also been described in association with other systemic disorders.
Despite the nomenclature, perforation of the globe is extremely rare
as integrity is maintained by a thin layer of fibrous tissue. Differential
diagnosis is from the innocuous scleral hyaline plaque and senile
scleromalacia.
984. Transport of Ascorbic acid to lens is done by which of the following?
 a) Myoinositol

 b) Choline

 c) Taurine

 d) Na-K ATPase



Correct Answer - D
The lens epithelium is the principal site of energy production of the lens that is used for
transport of inorganic ions and amino acids by an active process involving Na and K
activated ATPase.
Ref: Histopathology of Preclinical Toxicity Studies: Interpretation and Relevance ... By
Peter Greaves, Peter Greaves (M.B., Ch.B.), 2007, Page 896; Transport of vitamin C in the
lens, Curr Eye Res. 1987 Jul;6(7):885-96; Adler's Physiology of the eye 10th Edition,
Page 131; Ascorbic acid and the Eye, Am J Clin Nutr 1991;54:1198S-1202S.
985. Blue dot cataract is caused by
 a) Diabetes

 b) Wilson's disease

 c) Atopic dermatitis

 d) Chalcosis



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e.,Atopic dermatitis [Ref Parson's 21"/e p. 259]
Blue dot cortical cataract is caused by myotonic dystrophy and
atopic dermatitis.
986. Which of the following is complication of
     prolonged use of corticosteroid eye
     drops?
 a) Posterior Subcapsular cataract

 b) Nuclear cataract

 c) Capsular cataract

 d) Cortical cataract



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Posterior Subcapsular cataract
Causes of posterior subcapsular cataract :
Myotoic dystrophy                Down's syndromeIonizing radiation
Wilson's disease                 Corticosteroids Galactosemia
DM                               Busulfan         Senile cataract
Infrared/heat cataract           Chloroquine      Trauma
(glass-blower's or glass worker)Atopic dermatitis
987. False about treatment of cataract in
     children is
 a) ECCE is the treatment of choice

 b) In case of bilateral cataract imparing vision surgery must be
    done by 4-6 weeks of age

 c) Lensectomy is not one of the methods of extracapsular
    extraction

 d) Intraocular lens implantation must be done only after 2 years of
    age



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Lensectomy is not one of the methods of
extracapsular extraction [Ref Textbook of pediatric cataract
surgery p. 194]
The critical period for developing the fixation reflex in both unilateral
and bilateral visual deprivation disorders is between 2-4 months of
age. Any cataract dense enough to impair vision must be dealt with
before this age and the earliest possible time is preferred.
988. What is the new advance in cataract
     surgery?
 a) Femtosecond Laser

 b) Neodymium Laser

 c) Nanosecond Laser

 d) Picosecond Laser



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Femtosecond laser [Ref Femtosecond laser-
assisted cataract surgery: Kendall E. Donaldson,
Rosa Braga-Mele,Florence Cabot, for the ASCRS Refractive
Cataract Surgery Subcommittee]
Femtosecond laser-assisted cataract surgery provides surgeons an
exciting new option to potentially improve patient outcomes and
safety.
In this surgery a femtosecond laser is used for various steps like
lens fragmentation and capsulotomy.
Although the results have been good the technology is currently very
expensive.
989. Which of the following step is not done
     during phacoemulsification surgery for
     cataract?
 a) Irrigation and drainage of cortex

 b) Continuous curvilinear capsulorrhexis

 c) Foldable IOL implantation

 d) Sclerocorneal tunnel



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Sclerocorneal tunnel [Ref Phacoemulsification by
vajpayee]
The steps in phacoemulsification include : (i) Corneoscleral incision,
(ii) Continuous curvilinear capsulorrhexis, (iii) Hydrodissection and
hydrodelineation, (iv) Emulsification and aspiration of nucleus and
then cortex, (v) Foldable IOL implantation in posterior chamber.
990. Phacoemulsification uses
 a) High frequency sound waves

 b) Infrared waves

 c) Ultraviolet rays

 d) None of these



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., High frequency sound waves [Ref Kanski's 8th/e
chapter 9, p. 281]
In Phacoemulsification, lens nucleus is emulsified using high
frequency sound waves.
991. Post operative complications of cataract
     are all except?
 a) After cataract

 b) Endophthalmitis

 c) Glaucoma

 d) Scleritis



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Scleritis [Ref Ophthalmology by Duker 2"d/e p.
484]
There are so many complications of cataract surgery, Here are
only important ones:?
After cataract (opacification of capsule)
Retinal detachment
Vitreous prolapse & loss
Neovascular glaucoma
Cystoid macular edema
Anterior uveitis (iridocyclitis)
Endophthalmitis
Iris prolapse
Aphakic glaucoma
Stria keratopathy & Pseudophakic bullous keratopathy
Fibrous & endothelial growth
Corneal endothelial damage
992. Which of the following is the most
     important factor in the prevention of the
     endophthalmitis in cataract surgery?
 a) Preoperative preparation with povidone iodine

 b) One week antibiotic therapy prior to surgery

 c) Trimming of eyelashes

 d) Use of intravitreal antibiotics



Correct Answer - A
Ans. Preoperative preparation with povidone iodine
993. Hemeralopia is seen in
 a) Retinal detachment

 b) Retinitis pigmentosa

 c) Optic neuritis

 d) Subcapsular cataract



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Subcapsular cataract [Ref Kanski 8th/e Chap. 9,
p. 270]
Hemeralopia is the inability to see clearly in bright light ( also known
as day blindness) and is the exact opposite of nyctalopia (night
blindness).
Subcapsular cataract
Anterior subcapsular cataract lies directly under the lens capsule
and is associated with fibrous metaplasia of the lens epithelium.
Posterior subcapsular opacity lies just in front of the posterior
capsule and has a granular or plaque-like appearance on oblique slit
lamp biomicroscopy, but typically appears black and vacuolated on
retroillumination; the vacuoles are swollen migratory lens epithelial
cells (bladder or Wedl), similar to those commonly seen
postoperatively in posterior capsular opacification. Due to its location
at the nodal point of the eye, a posterior subcapsular opacity often
has a particularly profound effect on vision.
Patients are characteristically troubled by glare, for instance from the
headlights of oncoming cars, and symptoms are increased by
miosis, such as occurs during near visual activity and in bright
sunlight (day blindness).
   994. A child has got a congenital cataract
        involving the visual axis which was
        detected by the parents right at birth.
        This child should be operated:
    a) Immediately

    b) At 2 months of age

    c) At 1 year of age when the globe becomes normal sized

    d) After 4 years when entire ocular and orbital growth becomes
       normal



   Correct Answer - A
   Ans. A [Immediately]
   Congenital cataract - Timing of surgery
1. Bilateral dense - cataract requires early surgery (i.e. by 6 weeks of
   age ) to prevent the development of stimulus deprivation amblyopia
2. Bilateral partial- cataract may not require surgery until later if at all,
   in cases of doubt, it may be prudent to defer surgery monitor lens
   opacity, and visual function and intervene later if vision deteriorates.
3. Unilateral dense - cataract merits urgent surgery (within days )
   followed by aggressive anti-amblyopia therapy the cataract is
   detected after 16 weeks of age then surgery can be delayed little
   because amblyopia is refractory
   4. Partial unilateral - cataract can usually be observed or treated
   non surgically with pupillary dilatation and possibly part-time
   contralateral occlusion to prevent amblyopia "The critical period of
   developing the fixation reflexes in both unilateral and bilateral visual
   deprivation disorders is between 2 and 4 months of age, any
   cataract dense enough to impair vision must be dealt with before this
age and the earliest possible time is preferred"
995. Which of the following is a good dye is
     used for lens in cataract surgery?
 a) Trypan Blue

 b) Fluoroscein

 c) India ink

 d) None



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'A
Trypan blue dye for anterior segment surgeries
Trypan blue has been used as an adjunct for improving visualization
of the anterior capsule during phacoemulsification of mature white
cataracts for the past few years.
Surgeons have long used dyes like indocyanine green, fluorescein,
and trypan blue to stain the anterior capsule in order to facilitate the
surgical procedure.
 studies comparing these 3 dyes have concluded that trypan
blue provides significantly more intensive staining of the
anterior lens capsule than the others
Trypan blue is easier to use than indocyanine green, because it
comes in a premixed solution, and it is available at a more
economical price.
996. Which of the following is a layer between
     choroid and retina?
 a) Bruch's membrane

 b) Descemet's membrane

 c) Photoreceptors

 d) Ganglion cell layer



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e.,Bruch's membrane [Ref Parson's 21"/e p. 321]
Bruch's membrane is the innermost layer of the choroid. It is also
called the vitreous lamina, because of its glassy microscopic
appearance. It is 2-4 thick. It lies between choroid and the retina.
997. 100 day glaucoma is caused by
 a) CRVO

 b) CRAO

 c) Buphthalmos

 d) Age related macular degeneration



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., CRVO
100-day glaucoma is typically seen in Ischemic CRVO.
Following central retinal vein occlusion, flame-shaped haemorrhages
develop in the nerve fiber layer of the retina, especially around the
optic disc, as a result of the high intravascular pressure that dilates
the veins and collateral vessels.
Edema of the optic disc and retina occur because of impaired
absorption of interstitial fluid.
Vision is generally poor but may recover surprisingly well,
considering the severity of the funduscopic changes.
Intractable closed-angle glaucoma, with severe pain and repeated
haemorrhages, commonly occurs 2 to 3 months after central retinal
vein occlusion (100-day glaucoma'; 'thrombotic glaucoma'), owing to
neovascularization of the iris and adhesions between the iris and the
anterior chamber angle (peripheral anterior synechiae).
998. Keeth Wagner classification is for
 a) Hypertensive retinopathy

 b) Diabetic maculpathy

 c) CRVO

 d) CRAO



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e.,Hypertensive retinopathy [Ref Robart W. Schrier
8"/e p. 1377]
  999. All are seen in non-proliferative diabetic
       retinopathy except ?
    a) Microaneurysm

    b) Neovascularization

    c) Hard exudates

    d) Macular edema



   Correct Answer - B
   Ans. is 'b' i.e., Neovascularization
   Classification of Diabetic retinopathy
   Nonproliferative                   Proliferative
   Background retinopathy
1. Microaneurysm
2. Dot and blot hemorrhage (deep Neovasculorization of the disc
   hemorrhage)                        (NVD)
3. Hard exudate                   1. Neovasculaization elsewhere in the
4. Macular edema                      retina (NVE)
   B) Preproliferative            2. Viffeous hemorrhage
   retinopathy                    3. Fibrovascular proli feration
1. Cotton-wool spots (soft        4. Trsction retinsl detachment
   exudates)                      5. Iris surface neovascularization
2. Venous beading                     (rubeosis iridis or
3. Extensive hemorrhage               neovascular glaacoma)
4. lntraretinal intrava scul ar abn
   ormalities (IRMA
1000. All of the following are the causes of
      exudative retinal detachment except:
 a) Retinopathy of toxaemia of pregnancy

 b) Retinopathy of prematurity

 c) Exudative retinopathy of Coats

 d) Sympathetic ophthalmia



Correct Answer - B
Ans. Retinopathy of prematurity
1001. In which of the following, intraocular
      pressure is very high and inflammation
      is minimum?
 a) Glaucomatocyclic crisis

 b) Acute iridocyclitis

 c) Hypetensive uveitis

 d) Angle closure glaucoma



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e.,Glaucomatocyclic crisis [Ref Khurana 4th/e p. 160]
Glaumatocyclic crisis
Glamatocyclitic crisis (Posner - Schlossman syndrome) is a
unilateral recurrent non- granulomatous iritis that is associated with
an elevated ocular pressure during the attacks. This self- limiting
condition tends to occur in persons during the third to sixth decade
and the visual fields, the optic nerve head, and anterior chamber
angle are normal.
A mild inflammatory reaction is very rarely present as evidenced by
a few keratic precipitates on the posterior surface of the cornea. The
cause of the glaucoma remains unknown, but a trabeculitis is
suspected. Many patients (55%) subsequently develop open angle
glaucoma
1002. Cell bodies of Muller's Cells are present
      in which layer of retina?
 a) Inner limiting membrane

 b) Outer nuclear layer

 c) Retinal pigment epithelium

 d) Ganglion cell layer



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Inner limiting membrane [Ref Histology of the
Eye, edited by William Krause, Dept. Pathology and Anatomical
science, University of Missouri School of Medicine]
Inner limiting membrane - basement membrane elaborated by Muller
cells.
Nerve fibre layer - axons of the ganglion cell nuclei (note that a thin
layer of Muller cell footplates exists between this layer and the inner
limiting membrane).
Ganglion cell layer - contains nuclei of ganglion cells, the axons of
which become the optic nerve fibres for messages and some
displaced amacrine cells.
Inner plexiform layer - contains the synapse between the bipolar cell
axons and the dendrites of the ganglion and amacrine cells.
Inner nuclear layer - contains the nuclei and surrounding cell bodies
(perikarya) of the amacrine cells, bipolar cells and horizontal cells.
Outer plexiform layer - projections of rods and cones ending in the
rod spherule and cone pedicle, respectively. These make synapses
with dendrites of bipolar cells. In the macular region, this is known as
the Fiber layer of Henle.
Outer nuclear layer - cell bodies of rods and cones.
External limiting membrane - layer that separates the inner segment
portions of the photoreceptors from their cell nucleus.
Layer of rods and cones - layer of rod cells and cone cells.
Retinal pigment epithelium - single layer of cuboidal cells. This is
closest to the choroid.
   1003. Retinal tears seen most commonly seen
         in ?
    a) Primary retinal detachment

    b) Secondary retinal detachment

    c) Tractional retinal detachment

    d) Exudative retinal detachment



   Correct Answer - A
   Ans. is 'a' i.e., Primary retinal detachment
   Retinal detachment is a disorder of eye in which retina peels away
   from its underlying layer of support tissue. Usually there is
   separation between the neuroepithelium (neurosensory epithelium)
   and the pigmented layer.
   The retinal separation is divided into:
1. Primary :- Rheugmatogenous retinal detachment.
2. Secondary :- Tractional retinal detachment and exudative retinal
   detachment.
   Rhegmatogeneous retinal detachment
   This is the commonest type of retinal detachment. This is due to a
   retinal break/tear/hole which allows the liquid vitreous to seeps into
   the subretinal space and separates the sensory retina from the
   pigmentary epithelium.
   Predisposing factors include : (i) Myopia, (ii) Previous intraocular
   surgery : cataract extraction, (aphakia) or pseudoaphakia); (iii)
   Trauma; (iv) Retinal degeneration (Lattice degeneration; Snail track
   degeneration, Senile or degenerative retinoschisis.
   Tractional retinal detachment
   It is due to pulling on the retina usually from fibro-vascular band in
   the vitreous cavity, i.e., vitroretinal band.
Exudative retinal detachment (solid retinal detachment)
It occurs due to the retina being pushed away by accumulation of
fluid or a neoplasm beneath the retina. This type of detachment is
caused by inflammatory disorders or by tumors.
1004. An elderly male with heart disease
      presents with sudden loss of vision in
      one eye; examination reveals cherry red
      spot; diagnosis is:
 a) Central retinal vein occlusion

 b) Central retinal artery occlusion

 c) Amaurosis fugax

 d) Acute ischemic optic neuritis



Correct Answer - B
B i.e. Central Retinal Artery Occlusion
Central retinal artery occlusion characteristically presents with
sudden painless loss of vision, cherry red spot & cattle-truck
appearanceQ (of retinal veins usually).
Source of emboli from carotid artery & heart disease, and thrombus
from arteriosclerosis along with hypertension & arteritis are
predisposing factors.
1005. Which of the following is true about
      signs of angle in closure glaucoma
      except
 a) Vertical semi dialted puil

 b) Edematous cornea

 c) Multiple iris nodules

 d) Edematous and hyperemic optic disc



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Multiple iris nodules [Ref Parson's 21"/e p. 290]
Clinical features of angle closure glaucoma
Conjunctiva is chemosed and congested (both conjunctival & ciliary
vessels are congested).
Cornea is oedematous and insensitive
Anterior chamber is very shallow & with aqueous flare Angle of
anterior chamber is closed (on gonioscopy)
Iris is discoloured
Pupil is semidilated, vertically oval and fixed. It is non reactive to
both light and accommodation.
IOP is markedly raised (40- 70 mm Hg)
Optic disc is oedematous & hyperemic
Fellow eye shows shallow anterior chamber and a narrow angle.
1006. Which of the following is false
      statement about vitreous?
 a) Anatomically, vitreous is present in anterior segment

 b) Vitreous largely contain water and hyaluronic acid

 c) Strongest attachment of vitreous base is at ora serrata

 d) Vitreous is attached anteriorly to the lens



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Anatomically, vitreous is present in anterior
segment [Ref Kanski 8thie Chap. 17, p. 722]
Vitreous is present in posterior segment of eye.
Vitreous humor is a jelly like fluid liquid that fills most (80%) of the
eye (from the lens back, i.e., in the posterior segment). The vitreous
consists largely of water (99%), a network of collagen fibrils, large
molecules of hyaluronic acid, peripheral cells (hyalocytes), and
mucopolysaccharides, forming a gel - like material.
There is a potential space between vitreous and retina, called
subhyaloid space. As we age, vitreous changes from a gel to a liquid
and gradually shrinks separating from the retina. This is when
people start seeing floaters (black spots in front of the eye).
  1007. Phacodonesis is seen in all except
    a) Traumatic injury to the eye

    b) Hypermature cataract

    c) Pseudoexfoliation

    d) Diabetes mellitus



   Correct Answer - D
   Ans. is 'd' i.e., Diabetes mellitus [Ref Kanski 8thie p. 300]
   Phacodonesis is the tremulousness or vibration of the lens with eye
   movement.
   It is seen in:
1. Trauma
2. Pseudoexfoliation syndrome
3. Hypermature cataract
4. Ectopia lentis
1008. Onset of stereopsis occurs at the age
      of:
 a) 3 to 5 months

 b) 1 to 2 years

 c) 5 years

 d) 7 years



Correct Answer - A
Ans. 3 to 5 months
1009. Homonymous hemianopia type of
      visual field defect is seen in all except ?
 a) Lateral geniculate body

 b) Total optic radiation

 c) Optic tract

 d) Optic chaisma



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Optic chaisma
1010. Normal vision with absence of direct &
      consensual light reflex, which nerve is
      involved ?
 a) Optic

 b) Oculomotor

 c) Trigeminal

 d) Abducens



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Oculomotor
This question can be solved by simple basic knowledge :-
Among the given options only oitic nerve and occulomotor newes
are related to light reflex'
a In optic nerve injury vision is also impaired (vision is normal in the
question)'
n Thus answer is oculomotor nerve
When light is shone to one (e.g. left) eye. left optic nerve canies
afferent impulse to brain and from brain efferent
impulse to ipsiplateral (left) eye comes through ipsilateral (left)
occulomotor nerye (for direct light reflex) and efferent
for contralatcral (right) eye comes through contralateral (right)
occulmotor nerve for consensual light reflex' When
light is shone to other (right) eyc, right optic nerve carries afferent
impulse to brain and from brain, efferent impulse to
right eye (for direct light reflex) comes through right occulmotor
nerve and effcrent fbr left eye (for consensual light
reflex) comes through left occulomotor nerve' So :-
Optic newe is responsibtefor direct light reJlex in ipsilateral eye and
consensual light reflexfor contralateral
eye. (lnabove example, afferent for right sided direct and left sided
consensual light reflex is through right optic
nerve; and atl-erent for left sided direct and right sided consensual
light reflex is through left optic nerve)'
Occulomotor nerve is responsible for direct and consensual light
reflex in the same eye' (ln above example'
efferent for right sided direct as rvell as consensual light reflex is
through right occulmotor nerve and ef'ferent for
left sided direct as well as consensual light reflex is through left
occulomotor nerve)'
In complete optic nerve lesion of one side (Amaurosis light
reflex or total afferent pupillary fect)
The ipsilateral direct reflex is lost
The ipsilateral conscnsual reflex is intact
The contralateral direct reflex is intact
The contralateral consensual reflex is lost
In occulomotor nerve lesion ofone side (efferent
pupillarydefect
The ipsilateral direct reflex is lost
The ipsilateral consensual reflex is lost
The contralateral direct reflex is intact
The contralateral consensual reflex is intact
1011. Which of the following is true about
      divergent squint
 a) It is also called exotropia

 b) It is more common than convergent squint

 c) It is a feature of 6th nerve palsy

 d) All of the following



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., It is also called exotropia [Ref Pediatric
strabismus 4th/e p. 218-224]
Divergent squint is also called as exotropia.
It less common than convergent squint (esotropia).
6th nerve palsy causes convergent squint.
1012. Crossed eye fixation is positive in -
 a) Esotropia

 b) Exotropia

 c) Hypertropia

 d) Hypotropia



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e.,Esotropia [Ref Internet]
Cross fixation is the use of the right eye to view the left visual field
and the use of the left eye to view the right visual field. This behavior
is very common in children with infantile esotropia. Cross fixation
often causes the appearance of not looking directly at a target and
parents often wonder if vision is reduced.
   1013. Partial ptosis is oculomotor nerve injury
         is due to intact -
    a) Supply from opposite oculomotor nerve

    b) Sympathetic innervation

    c) Parasympathetic innervation

    d) Action of orbicularis oculi



   Correct Answer - B
   Ans. is 'b' i.e., Sympathetic innervation [Ref Textbook of
   ophthalmic reconstructive surgeries p. 786]
   Motor nerve supply of lid is through three sources :?
1. Facial nerve supplying orbicularis oculi, (closing of lid)
2. Oculomotor supplying levator palpebrae superioris;
3. Sympathetic fibres supplying muller's muscle.
4. Both LPS and Muller muscle function to retract the lid, hence only
   partial ptosis is seen in oculomotor nerve palsy.
1014. Painful eye movement is a feature of :
 a) Iridocyclitis

 b) Papilledema

 c) Corneal ulcer

 d) Vernal catarrh



Correct Answer - A
Anterior uveitis , also known as iridocyclitis and iritis, is the inflammation of the iris and
anterior chamber. Anywhere from two-thirds to 90% of uveitis cases are anterior in location.
Injection, photophobia, pain, and blurred vision usually accompany iritis (anterior uveitis or
iridocyclitis).

Ref : Braverman R.S. (2012). Chapter 16. Eye. In W.W. Hay, Jr., M.J. Levin, R.R.
Deterding, J.J. Ross, J.M. Sondheimer (Eds), CURRENT Diagnosis & Treatment:
Pediatrics, 21e.
1015. Retinoblastomas show all of the
      following except
 a) Small round cells

 b) Necrosis

 c) Pseudorosettes and Fleurettes

 d) None



Correct Answer - D
Ans. 'd' is None (All are seen) [Ref Khurana 4thie p. 281]
Histology of retinoblastomas
The tumor arises from small round cells with large nuclei, i.e., it is a
tumor of a group called small round blue cell tumors.
Microscopic features of a well differentiated tumor include
Flexnerwintersteiner rosettes (specific for retinoblastoma), Homer
Wright rosettes, pseudorosettes and fleurettes formation.
1016. Which of the following is most common
      visual defect in papilloedema
 a) Amourosis fugax

 b) Homonymous hemianopia

 c) Homonymous quadrantopia

 d) Glare



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Amourosis fugax [Ref Clinical opthalmology
2"d% p. 349, 350]
Initially the symptoms of papilloedema are due to increased ICT, e.g.
headache, nausea, projectile vomiting and papilloedema.
Vision is normal initially.
In 25% of patients visual symptoms occur only in advanced severe
papilloedema, when optic atrophy sets in.
Typically, there is recurring brief episodes (transient) of visual
obscurations (Amaurosis fugax) lasting less then 30 seconds, in
which vision turns grey or blacks, sometimes decribed as if a veil
has fallen over the eyes.
The symptoms usually affect both eyes at once as papilloedema is
bilateral.
Central vision is affected late in the disease.
Initially there is enlargement of blind spot and progressive
contraction of the visual field (visual field becomes smaller).
Complete blindness sets in eventually.
Thus, characteristically there is gradually progressive painless loss
of vision
1017. What is the treatment of meibomianitis
      ?
 a) Cleansing the lid edges

 b) Application of moist heat

 c) Local antibiotics

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., All of the above [Ref Foster CS. The eye in skin
and mucous membrane disorders. In: Tasman W, Jaeger EA,
eds. Duane's Ophthalmology . 15th ed. Philadelphia, Pa:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2009:chap 27]
Meibomianitis
Meibomianitis is inflammation of the meibomian glands, a group of
oil-releasing (sebaceous) glands in the eyelids.
Causes
Any condition that increases the oily secretions of the meibomian
glands will allow excess oils to build up on the edges of the eyelids.
This allows for the excess growth of bacteria that are normally
present on the skin.
These problems can be caused by allergies, hormone changes
during adolescence, or skin conditions such as rosacea and acne.
Meibomianitis is often associated with blepharitis, which can cause a
buildup of a dandruff-like substance at the base of the eyelashes.
In some people with meibomianitis, the glands will be plugged so
that there is less oil being made for the normal tear film. These
people often have symptoms of dry eye.
1018. Blow out fracture of orbit leads to
      fracture in
 a) Floor

 b) Posterior Medial wall

 c) Lateral wall

 d) Roof of the orbit



Correct Answer - B
Ans:B
1. A blow out fracture of the orbital floor is typically caused by a
sudden increase in orbital pressure by a striking object which is
greater than 5 cm in diameter, greater than the orital sin diameter
such as a fist or tennis ball.
2. The fracture most frequently involves the floor of the orbit along
the thin bone covering the infra orbital canal.
3. The floor consists of three bones: Zygomatic, Maxillary and
Palatine.
4. The posteromedial portion of the maxillary bone is relatively
weak and may be involved in a ‘blowout’ fracture.
5. Fracture of the Roof of the orbit known as ‘blow in’ fractures.
6. Most medial wall orbital fractures are associated with floor fracture
1019. Most common site of basal cell
      carcinoma of the eye is
 a) Eyelid

 b) Conjunctiva

 c) Cornea

 d) Lacrimal apparatus



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Eyelid [Ref Renu Jogi 4th/e p. 420; Khurana 4th/e
p. 360]
Basal cell carcinoma is the commonest malignant tumor of the lids
(90%) usually seen in elderly people.
It is locally malignant and involves most commonly lower lid (50%)
followed by media! canthus (25%), upper lid (10-15%) and outer
canthus.
"Basal cell carcinoma is seen in the lower lid near the inner canthus
usually
1020. Vitrectomy should be considered if the
      vitreous haemorrhage is not absorbed
      within:
 a) 1 month

 b) 3 months

 c) 6 months

 d) 2 months



Correct Answer - B
Ans. 3 months
1021. Ankyloblepheron is defined as
 a) Adhesion of the lid to the eyeballs

 b) Adhesion of the lid margins to each other

 c) Inturned eyelash

 d) Inflammation of the lid margin



Correct Answer - B
Ans is 'b' i.e., Adhesion of the lid margins to each other [Ref:
Kanski 8th le p. 52]
Disorders of the eyelids
Blepharitis :- Chronic inflammation of lid margin.
Blephritis acarica : Inflammation of lid margin caused by Demodex
folliculorum. Madarosis :- Loss of eye lashes.
Trichiasis :- Misdirected eyelashes which rub against the eyeball in
normal position of lid margin. Distichiasis :- an abnormal extra row of
cilia taking place of meibomian glands.
Entropion :- Inward rolling or inturning of lid margin.
Ectropion :- Out rolling or outward turning of lid margin.
Symblepharon :- Adhesion of the lids to eyeball.
Ankyloblepharon :- Adhesion of margins of two eyelids.
Blepharophimosis Palpebral fissure appears to be contracted at the
outer canthus. Lagophthalmos :- Incomplete closure of the palpebral
aperture when eyes are shut. Tylosis :- Thickening of lid margin.
Basal cell carcinoma :- Most common malignant tumor of eyelid
Cloboma of lid :- Triangular gap in nasal side of upper lid
1022. The globe is displaced to which side in
      lacrimal gland tumour?
 a) Inferotemporal

 b) Inferonasal

 c) Superotemoral

 d) Nasal



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Inferonasal [Ref Bernardini FP, Devoto MH,
Croxatto JO. Epithelial tumors of the lacrimal gland: an update.
Curr Opin Ophthalmol 2008;19:409-13]
All lacrimal gland tumors typically share the following symptoms:
facial asymmetry due to displacement of the globe, diplopia, ptosis,
limited ocular motility, and enlargement of the lacrimal gland.
Epithelial lesions tend to develop mostly in the orbital lobe of the
lacrimal gland and are principally unilateral.
The initial sign is usually inferior and nasal displacement of the globe
and proptosis, due to the superotemporal location of the lacrimal
gland in the anterior aspect of the orbit.
1023. 'D' shaped pupil is seen in
 a) Glaucoma

 b) Dislocation of lens

 c) Iridodialysis

 d) Iridocyclitis



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Iridodialysis [Ref Khurana 4thie p. 404]
Iridodialysis is detachment of iris from its root at the ciliary body. It
results in D shaped pupil and a lack biconvex area seen at the
periphery.
1024. Investigation of choice for optic neuritis
      is ?
 a) MRI Brain and orbit

 b) Ct scan Brain and orbit

 c) Vitreous biopsy

 d) Electooculogram



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., MRI Brain and orbit [Ref Kanski 8th/e Chap. 19, p.
784]
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) is far more superior for the
study of soft tissue and thus, for most neuro-ophthalmic conditions,
MRI is the investigation of choice.
1025. Enophthalmos is seen in ?
 a) Blow out fracture of orbit wall

 b) Hyperthyroidism

 c) Radiation Injuries

 d) Diabetes mellitus



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Blow out fracture of orbit wall
Enophthalmos is seen in blow out fracture of orbit wall.
1026. Ocular findings in diabetes are all
      except -
 a) Retinopathy

 b) Early senile cataract

 c) Neovascular glaucoma

 d) Blepharophimosis



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Blepharophimosis [Ref Kanski's 8`Ve chapter 13,
p. 520]
1027. Mucin layer tear flilm deficiency occurs
      in:
 a) Keratoconjunctivitis sicca

 b) Lacrimal gland removal

 c) Canalicular block

 d) Herpetic keratitis



Correct Answer - A
A i.e Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
1028. Which of the following is a long term
      side effect of phakic 10Ls
 a) Chronic glaucoma

 b) Retinal detachment

 c) Optic neuritis

 d) None



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Chronic glaucoma [Ref Chen LI, et al.
Metaanalysis of cataract development after phakic intraocular
lens surgery. J Cataract Refract Surg 2008;34:1181-200.]
Phakic intraocular lenses (pIOLs) are artificial lenses that are
inserted either on top of the iris or in between the iris and the natural
lens. They are used to treat refractive error without removing cornea
tissue or the lens.
Long term risks of phakic IOLS
Chronic intraocular pressure elevation can produce indolent vision
damage from angle closure glaucoma.
The surgical procedure itself also induces some endothelial cell
damage and if the prosthetic is in close proximity to the cornea,
chronic loss could be induced.
Finally, chronic inflammation or prosthetic-lens touch can induce
cataract formation
1029. Most common protozoan causing
      keratitis is
 a) Plasmodium

 b) Acanthamoeba

 c) Toxoplasma

 d) W. bancrofti



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is `b' i.e., Acanthamoeba [Ref Kanski 8th/e p. 197]
"Acanthamoeba keratitis is the most common keratitis caused by a
protozoan especially in contact lens users".
1030. Smokers are prone to which lung
      infection
a) Mycobacterium tuberculosis

b) Pneumonia

c) Influenza

d) All the above



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. All the above
1031. Some patients with severe form of
      Idiopathic infantile hypercalcemia,
      presnt with phenotypic features similar
      to which of the following?
 a) Williams syndrome

 b) Potters syndrome

 c) Angelman syndrome

 d) VHL syndrome



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Williams syndrome
In the severe form, Prenatal and postnatal growth failure are
common and number of phenotypic features of Williams syndrome
are observed in some of the patients include cardiovascular
abnormalities (usually supravalvular aortic stenois and peripheral
pulmonic stenosis), late psychomotor development, selective mental
deficiency, a characteristic unusual facies and short stature.
The serum calcium levels range between 12 - 19mg/ dL.
1032. Which liver disease/s is/are associated
      with ductopenia?
 a) Chronic graft rejection

 b) Hepatic sarcoidosis

 c) Paraneoplastic syndrome related to hodgkins lymphoma

 d) All the above



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. All the above
Loss of bile ducts from the portal tracts is referred to as ductopenia.
Ductopenia is most commonly seen related to chronic allograft
rejection and includes drug related injury, primary binary cirrhosis,
primary sclerosing cholangitis, chronic graft-vs-host disease, hepatic
sarcoidosis, paraneoplastic syndrome related to Hodgkin disease,
and syndromic paucity of bile ducts (Alagille syndrome).
1033. 1 to 2 mm haemorrhages in skin are known as:
 a) Micro bleed

 b) Petechiae

 c) Purpura

 d) None of the above



Correct Answer - B
Minute 1- to 2-mm hemorrhages into skin, mucous membranes, or serosal surfaces are
called petechiae.
These are most commonly associated with locally increased intravascular pressure, low
platelet counts (thrombocytopenia), or defective platelet function (as in uremia).

Ref: Robbins 8th edition Chapter 4.
   1034. Which of the following is not true about
         metabolic syndrome?
    a) It is also called Syndrome X

    b) Acanthosis and signs of hyperandrogenism may be seen

    c) Type A has autoantibodies against the insulin receptor

    d) Insulin resistance increases the risk of type 2 DM in patients
       with PCOS



   Correct Answer - C
   Answer- C. Type A has autoantibodies against the insulin
   receptor
   It is an insulin resistance condition which comprises a spectrum of
   disorders, with hyperglycemia representing one of the most readily
   diagnosed features.
   The metabolic syndrome, the insulin resistance syndrome, or
   syndrome X are terms used to describe a constellation of metabolic
   derangements that includes insulin resistance, hypertension,
   dyslipidemia (decreased HDL and elevated triglycerides), central or
   visceral obesity, type 2 diabetes or IGT/IFG, and accelerated cardio-
   vascular disease.
   Acanthosis nigricans and signs of hyperandrogenism
   (hirsutism, acne, and oligomenorrhea in women) are also
   common physical features.
   Two distinct syndromes-
1. type A, which affects young women and is characterized by severe
   hyperinsulinemia, obesity, and features of hyperandrogenism; and
   type A insulin resistance syndrome have an undefined defect in the
   insulin-signaling pathway.
2. type B, which affects middle-aged women and is characterized by
severe hyperinsulinemia, features of hyperandrogenism, and
autoimmune disorders.
1035. Metabolic syndrome diagnosis in men
      based on NCEP ATP III criteria includes
      the following except
a) Abdominal obesity > 40 inches

b) HDL < 50 mg / dL

c) BP >/= 130/85 mm Hg

d) Fasting glucoe > 110 mg/ dL



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. HDL < 50 mg / dL
1036. Water hammer pulse seen in
 a) >Aortic stenosis

 b) >Aortic regurgitation

 c) >Aortic stenosis and Aortic regurgitation

 d) >Mitral regurgitation



Correct Answer - B
Aortic regurgitation [Ref. Harrison 17h/e p 1476 & 166/e p 1400
Kundu, bedside clinics in medicine]
Water hammer pulse
It is a large bounding pulse, associated with increased stroke
volume of the left ventricle and decrease in the peripheral
resistance, leading to a wide pulse pressure.
The pulse strikes the palpating finger with a rapid, forcefid jerk and
quickly disappears.
It is best felt in the radial artery with the patients arm elevated.
It is seen in Aortic regurgitation.
Pathophysiology of water hammer pulse
In Aortic regurgitation the stroke volume is high, so the systolic
pressure is high and this is responsible for sharp rise in the pulse.
The stroke volume is high because the left ventricle gets blood from
two sources during the diastole i.e. blood leaking from the Aorta and
the blood it receives from left atria.
The collapse occurs because
Diastolic leak of blood into the left ventricle from the Aorta
Rapid run off to the periphery as a result of low systemic vascular
resistance (the increased cardiac output stimulates the
baroreceptors in the aortic arch and the result is reflex vasodilatation
of the peripheral vessels into which the blood flows rapidly).
Wiry are arms elevated in the examination ?
When the arm is raised there is fall of blood column resulting in
vasodilation and thus helps to reduce the diastolic pressure more, so
the pulse pressure widens.
It may be so that the artery palpated becomes more in the line of
Aorta after elevation of the arm and thus allows the direct systolic
ejection and diastolic backward flow.
1037. FALSE statement regarding the ECG in acute pericarditis is:
 a) T wave inversion develop before ST elevations return to
    baseline

 b) Global ST segment elevation is seen in early pericarditis

 c) Sinus tachycardia is a common finding

 d) PR segment depression is present in majority of patients



Correct Answer - A
T wave inversion develop after ST elevations return to baseline.

There are four stages of ECG changes in the evolution of acute pericarditis. In stage 1,
there is widespread elevation of the ST segments, often with upward concavity, involving
two or three standard limb leads and V2 to V6, with reciprocal depressions only in aVR and
sometimes V1, as well as depression of the PR segment Usually there are no significant
changes in QRS complexes. In stage 2, after several days, the ST segments return to
normal, and only then, or even later, do the T waves become inverted (stage 3). Ultimately,
weeks or months after the onset of acute pericarditis, the ECG returns to normal in stage 4.

Ref: Harrisons principles of internal medicine, 18th edition, Page: 1971
1038. Ejection click of pulmonary stenosis is
      better heard in
 a) Inspiration

 b) Expiration

 c) Patient bending forward

 d) Patient lying in left lateral position



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Expiration
It emanates from a stenotic pulmonary valve or a dilated pulmonary
artery.
Its most characteristic feature is to disappear or become markedly
softer with inspiration i.e. it is better heard in expiration.
It is localized to 2nd and 3rd intercostal spaces.
They may also be present in patients with pulmonary hypertention or
the ones with dilated pulmonary artery.
1039. Reciprocal changes in ECG in patients
      with inferior wall myocardial infarction
      are seen in which leads
 a) I

 b) II

 c) III

 d) aVF



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. I
1040. All are features of aortic stenosis
      except
 a) Congestive heart failure due to systolic or diastolic dysfunction

 b) Presence of ejection systolic murmur

 c) Presence of pulsus tardus

 d) Pressure in the aorta is the same as in left ventricle



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Pressure in the aorta is the same as in left ventricle
Clinical Findings-
Systolic ejection murmur
Carotid pulsus parvus et tardus
Diminished aortic component of 2nd heart sound
Sudden death in severe stenosis after exercise
Classical triad-
Angina
Syncope
Shortness of breath (heart failure)
1041. Which of the following is not true about
      bicuspid aortic valve?
 a) Usually undetected in early life

 b) It is more common in females than in males

 c) Post-stenotic dilatation of ascending aorta can be seen

 d) Diagnosis is made by echocardiography



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. It is more common in females than in males
The congenital bicuspid aortic valve, which may initially be
functionally normal, is one of the most common congenital
malformations of the heart and may go undetected in early life.
More frequent in males (3:1)
Diagnosis is made by echocardiography, which reveals the
morphology of the aortic valve and aortic root and quantitates
severity of stenosis or regurgitation.
The ascending aorta is often dilated, misnamed "poststenotic"
dilatation; this is due to histologic abnormalities of the aortic media
similar to those in Marfan's syndrome and may result in aortic
dissection.
1042. Which of the following hemodynamic
      changes is not evident in cardiac
      tamponade during diastole?
 a) Right atrial and ventricular collapse

 b) Absent y wave on JVP

 c) Biphasic venous return

 d) Elevated pericardial pressure



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Biphasic venous return
During the diastole the pericardial pressure remains elevated.
It is greater than the intracavitary pressure thus there is no filling
during the diastole
The absence of venous return during the diastole leads to absence
of "y" waves on the J.V.P. and the "diastolic collapse" of the right
atria and ventricle.
1043. Major criteria for infective endocarditis
      include which of the following
a) Injection drug user

b) Fever

c) Oslers nodes

d) Typical organism of infective endocarditis isolated from two
   separate blood cultures



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Typical organism of infective endocarditis isolated
from two separate blood cultures
1044. Which of the following ECG features are
      not seen in patients with ventricular
      tachycardias?
a) Bizzare QRS complexes

b) Presence of AV dissociation [fusion beats]

c) Prolonged duration of QRS complexes

d) P pulmonale



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. P pulmonale
AV dissociation (atrial capture, fusion beats)
QRS duration > 140 ms for RBBB type V1 morphology, VI > 160 ms
for LBBB type VI morphology
Frontal plane axis - 900 to 1800
Delayed activation during initial phase of the QRS complex
LBBB pattern - R wave in V1, V, > 40 ms
RBBB pattern - onset of R wave to nadir of S > 100 ms
Bizarre QRS pattern that does not mimic typical RBBB or LBBB
QRS complex.
Concordance of QRS complex in all precordial leads
RS or dominant S in V6 for RBBB VT Q wave in V6 with LBBB QRS
pattern
Monophasic R or biphasic qR of R/S in V, with RBBB pattern
1045. Cerebro-occulo-genital syndrome has
      the following features except
 a) Microcephaly

 b) Short stature

 c) Agenesis of corpus callosum

 d) Flaccid quadriplegia



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Flaccid quadriplegia
Cerebro-occulo-genital syndrome is associated with microcephaly,
short stature, microophthalmia, agenesis of corpus callosum,
hypospadias and spastic quadriplegia.
1046. Pulsus biseferians, which of the
      following is not true
 a) It is seen in aortic regurgitation

 b) It is better felt in peripheral arteries

 c) It has one peak in systole and one in diastole

 d) It has two peaks



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. It has one peak in systole and one in diastole
It is characterized by two systolic peaks.
It is seen in patients of aortic regurgitation.
The pulse wave upstroke rises rapidly and forcefully producing the
first systolic peak (percussion wave). A brief decline in pressure is
followed by a smaller and somewhat slower rising positive pulse
wave.
In bisiferians pulse the second rise in systole is enhanced by
reflection from peripheral arteries therefore it is more prominent in
peripheral pulse.
1047. The most common reentrant
      tachycardia associated with WPW
      syndrome is
a) Orthodromic AV reentry

b) Antidromic AV reentry

c) Rapidly conducting AF

d) None



Correct Answer - A
Answer is A (Orthodromic AV reentry)
123.The most common macro-reentrant tachycardia associated
WPW syndrome is orthodromic AV reentry.
The most common macro-reentrant tachycardia associated with
WPW syndrome is referred to as Orthodromic AV reentry'
1048. Square wave seen in ECG recording
      denote
 a) Atrial depolarization

 b) Ventricular depolarization

 c) Ventricular repolarization

 d) Standardization of ECG



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Standardization of ECG
Each ECG machine has a provision for Standardization (STD) of
Calibration (CAL).
The standardization lever releases a current of 1 mV to the stylus of
ECG machine that records a shift of 10 mm on the ECG paper.
The standardization current gives rise to a wave pattern called
square wave pattern as depicted in the image below.
1049. Which of the following is not true about
      Torsades de pointes?
 a) Presence of prolonged QT interval on ECG

 b) Presence of polymorphic QRS complexes

 c) It is a type of supraventricular tachycardia

 d) QRS complexes appear to rotate around the isoelectric
    baseline of ECG



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. It is a type of supraventricular tachycardia
The significance of the long QT syndrome is its association with the
development of a specific type of ventricular tachycardia called
Torsades de points or polymorphic ventricular tachycardia
A wide complex tachyarrythmia with QRS complexes of varying axis
and morphology that appear to rotate around the iso electric
baseline.
1050. Prolonged QT interval is seen in all of
      the following except
a) Hypokalemia

b) Hypocalcemia

c) Use of macrolide antibiotitcs

d) Hypernatremia



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Hypernatremia
Metabolic
Hypokalemia
Hypocalcemia
Hypomagnesemia
1051. Following are the clinical signs of
      widened pulse pressure seen in
      patients of aortic regurgitation except
 a) Corrigans sign

 b) De Mussets sign

 c) Water Hammer pulse

 d) Diastolic murmur



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Diastolic murmur
Corrigan’s pulse: A rapid and forceful distension of the arterial pulse
with a quick collapse
De Musset’s sign: Bobbing of the head with each heartbeat (like a
bird walking)
Muller’s sign: Visible pulsations of the uvula
Quincke’s sign: Capillary pulsations seen on light compression of the
nail bed
Traube’s sign: Systolic and diastolic sounds heard over the femoral
artery (“pistol shots”)
Duroziez’s sign: Gradual pressure over the femoral artery leads to a
systolic and diastolic bruit
Hill’s sign: Popliteal systolic blood pressure exceeding brachial
systolic blood pressure by ≥ 60 mmHg (most sensitive sign for aortic
regurgitation)
Water hammer pulse
1052. All of the following are characteristic
      features of Tricuspid Atresia except -
 a) Left Axis deviation

 b) Right ventricular hypoplasia

 c) Pulmonary vascularity is diminished

 d) Splitting of S2



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Spliting of S2
Atresia of the tricuspid valve results in the absence of a
communication between the right atrium and right ventricle therefore
the right ventricle is underdeveloped the inflow portion being absent.
The only exit for systemic venous blood coming to the right atrium is
by way ofAtrial Septa! defect. Through this the blood goes to left
atrium from where it enters left ventricle.
A ventricular septal defect provides communication between the left
ventricle and the outflow portion of the right ventricle. The left
ventricle therefore maintain both the systemic as well as the
pulmonary circulation thus there is hypertrophy of the left ventricle
which is reflected by left axis deviation in ECG.
The pulmonary blood flow is dependent on the size of the ventricular
defect, the smaller the VSD, the lesser the pulmonary blood
flow. 90% patients of Triscuspid Atresia have diminished pulmonary
blood flow. o Auscultatory finding in case of Tricuspid Atresia
S1 -Normal         S2 - Single      Murmur grade II to grade III / VI
1053. Episode of stable angina pectoris
      typically lasts for
 a) Less than 1 min

 b) 2 - 5 mins

 c) 5 - 10 mins

 d) > 10 mins



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. 2 - 5 mins
Angina is usually crescendo- decrescendo in nature, typically lasts 2
to 5 min, and can radiate to either shoulder and to both arms
(especially the ulnar surfaces of the forearm and hand).
It also can arise in or radiate to the back, interscapular region, root
of the neck, jaw, teeth, and epigastrium. Angina is rarely localized
below the umbilicus or above the mandible.
1054. Levine sign is seen in
 a) Stable angina pectoris

 b) Acute bronchial asthma

 c) Hemolytic anemia

 d) Gastroesophageal reflux disease



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Stable angina pectoris
Stable Angina Pectoris:
This episodic clinical syndrome is due to transient myocardial
ischemia
When the patient is asked to localize the sensation, he or she
typically places a hand over the sternum, sometimes with a clenched
fist, to indicate a squeezing, central, substernal discomfort (Levine's
sign).
1055. Not True about Prinzmetal's angina:
 a) May present at rest

 b) Occurs due atherosclerotic obstruction of coronary arteries

 c) Smoking is a risk factor

 d) Nitrates are used for treatment



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Occurs due atherosclerotic obstruction of coronary
arteries
This syndrome is due to focal spasm of an epicardial coronAry
artery, leading to severe myocardial ischemia leading to severe
myocardial ischemia.
The right coronary artery is the most frequent site, followed by the
left anterior descending coronary artery.
Acetylcholine released by the parasympathetic system at rest will
simply cause contraction of the vascular smooth muscle.
It usually occurs at rest and is associated with transient ST- segment
elevation.
Etiology
cigarette smokers
1056. The most common toxin causing
      Dilated Cardiomyopathy is:
 a) Alcohol

 b) Chemotherapeutic agents

 c) Heavy metal

 d) Occupational exposure



Correct Answer - A
Answer is A (Alcohol)
Chronic Alcohol Consumption is the most common cause of Toxic
Dilated Cardiomyopathy. Alcohol is the most common toxin
implicated in chronic dilated cardiomyopathy'
Note :
Dilated cardiomyopathy is the most common type of cardiomyopathy
The most common cause of dilated cardiomyopathy is Idiopathic
(Two-Thirds) Alcohol Consumption is the most common cause of
Toxic Dilated Cardiomyopathy
1057. Obstructive shock can be seen in
 a) Pulmonary embolism

 b) Tension pneumothorax

 c) Pericardial tamponade

 d) All the above



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. All the above
Causes in trauma patients include pulmonary embolism, pericardial
tamponade, acute coronary syndromes, increased intrathoracic
pressure as in tension pneumothorax, positive pressure ventilation
and excessive PEEP.
1058. Pharmacological stress during stress
      myocardial radionucleotide perfusion
      imaging can be induced using
 a) Dipyridamole

 b) Adenosine

 c) Dobutamine

 d) All the above



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. All the above
Dipyridamole or adenosine can be given to create a coronary "steal"
by temporarily increasing flow in nondiseased segments of the
coronary vasculature at the expense of diseased segments.
Alternatively, a graded incremental infusion of dobutamine may be
administered to increase MVO2.
The development of a transient perfusion defect with a tracer such
as thallium-201 or 99m-technetium sestamibi is used to detect
myocardial ischemia.
1059. While treating patients with malignant
      hypertention the maximum allowed
      decrease in blood pressure in the first 2
      - 6 hours should not exceed %
 a) 15

 b) 20

 c) 25

 d) 30



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. 25
Hypertension with systolic BP 180 mmHg and diastolic BP 120 mm
Hg is classified as "severe hypertension".
Severe hypertension ( 180/120) does not necessarily mean
hypertensive emergency or malignant hypertension. ? Patients with
B.P. 180 / 120 may remain asymptomatic without causing any
complications.
The initial aim of treatment in malignant hypertension and
hypertensive encephalopathy is to lower diastolic blood pressure to
about 100 to 105 mm Hg within minutes to, two- six hours with the
maximum fall in B.P. over this period of time not exceeding 25% of
the original value.
1060. ECG pattern seen in pulmonary
      embolism is:
      September 2009, March 2013
 a) S3Q3T1

 b) S1Q1T3

 c) S1Q3T3

 d) S3Q3T3.



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C: S1Q3T3
1061. Contraindication for percutaneous
      ballon mitral valvotomy include the
      following except
 a) Presence of pulmonary hypertension

 b) Left atrial thrombus

 c) Severe mitral regurgitation

 d) Commissural calcification



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Presence of pulmonary hypertension
Patients with valvular calcification, thickened fibrotic leaflets with
decreased mobility and subvalvular fusion, have incidence of acute
complications and higher rate of restenosis on followup. Such
patients are considered a contraindication for the procedure. Other
contraind ications include more than moderate mitral regurgitation,
presence of left atrial thrombi, and commissural calcification.
1062. Mitral valve replacement is
      recommended in patients with
 a) Moderate MS in NYHA class II

 b) Moderate MS in NYHA class III

 c) Severe MS in NYHA class II

 d) Severe MS in NYHA class III



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Severe MS in NYHA class III
Since there are also long-term complications of valve replacement,
patients in whom preoperative evaluation suggests the possibility
that MVR may be required should be operated on only if they have
severe MS—i.e., an orifice area "1 cm2—and are in NYHA Class III,
i.e., symptomatic with ordinary activity despite optimal medical
therapy".
1063. HOCM is common in which age group?
 a) 10 - 30 years

 b) 20 - 40 years

 c) 30 - 50 years

 d) 40 - 60 years



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. 20 - 40 years
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is characterized by marked left
ventricular hypertrophy in the absence of other causes, such as
hyper- tension or valve disease.
Earlier termed hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy (HOCM)
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is characterized hemodynamically by
diastolic dysfunction, originally attributed to the hyper¬trophy,
fibrosis, and intraventricular gradient when present.
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy usually presents between the ages of
20 and 40 years. Dyspnea on exertion is the most common
presenting symptom, reflecting elevated intracardiac filling pressures
1064. Preferred vein for central venous
      catheter insertion is
 a) Right internal jugular vein

 b) Left internal jugular vein

 c) Right subclavian vein

 d) Right antecubital vein



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Right internal jugular vein
Placement of the central venous catheter is indicated for the
monitoring of the central venous pressure and for prolonged drug
administration for parenteral nutrition.
The preferred site for insertion of catheter into the superior venacava
is from internal jugular vein of the neck. Other used sites are from
the subclavian vein or from the peripheral vein in the antecubital
fossa.
Commonly used vein cannulation sites for central venous
access include:
Jugular vein
External jugular vein
Internal jugular vein (central, posterior, anterior approaches)
Subclavian vein (supraclavicular, infraclavicular, axillary
approaches)
Femoral vein
Basilic vein
1065. Kerley B lines seen in mitral stenosis
      when the resting left atrial pressure
      exceeds
 a) 10 mm Hg

 b) 20 mm Hg

 c) 30 mm Hg

 d) 40 mm Hg



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. 20 mm Hg
Kerley B lines are fine, dense, opaque, horizontal lines that are most
prominent in the lower and mid-lung fields and that result from
distention of interlobular septae and lymphatics with edema when
the resting mean LA pressure exceeds approximately 20 mmHg.
1066. Which of the following is the most
      common anamoly in patients with
      fanconi's anemia?
 a) Hyperpigmentation of the trunk, neck and intertriginous areas

 b) Absent radii and thumb

 c) Weak radial pulse

 d) Presence of horse shoe kidneys



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Hyperpigmentation of the trunk, neck and
intertriginous areas
Fanconi anemia (FA) is primarily inherited in an autosomal recessive
manner (one uncommon form is X-linked recessive).
The most common anomaly in FA is hyperpigmentation of the trunk,
neck, and intertriginous areas, as well as café-au-lait spots and
vitiligo, alone or in combination.
Anomalies of the feet, congenital hip dislocation, and leg
abnormalities are seen.
1067. Patients with which of the following
      conditions are at greatest risk of pernio
 a) Raynaud's phenomenon

 b) Kawasaki disease

 c) Henoch Schonlen purpura

 d) Hepatitis C infection



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Raynaud's phenomenon
The two most common nonfreezing peripheral cold injuries are
chilblain (pernio) and immersion (trench) foot.
Chilblain results from neuronal and endothelial damage induced by
repetitive exposure to dry cold.
Young females, particularly those with a history of Raynaud's
phenomenon, are at greatest risk of pernio (chilblain).
Persistent vasospasticity and vasculitis can cause erythema, mild
edema, and pruritus. Eventually plaques, blue nodules, and
ulcerations develop
1068. FEVI/FVC is decrease in:
 a) Asthma

 b) Kyphosis

 c) Scoliosis

 d) Fibrosis



Correct Answer - A
Answer is A (Asthma):
Decreased FEV1/FVC suggests a diagnosis of Obstructive Lung
Disease.
Amongst the options provided Asthma is the only condition that
leads to Obstructive Pattern of Lung Disease and hence is the
answer of choice Kyphosis, Scoliosis and Fibrosis are Restrictive
Lung Diseases that are characterized by Normal or Elevated
FEVI/FVC ratios.
1069. What is Tiffeneau - Pinelli index?
a) FEV1/FVC ratio

b) Body mass index

c) Quetlet index

d) Ventilation/Perfusion ratio



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. FEV1/FVC ratio
1070. Lights criteria is used for
 a) Pleural effusions

 b) Pericardial effusions

 c) Ascites

 d) Increased intracranial tension



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Pleural effusions
Light's critena for classification of unilateral pleural effusion
The pleural fluid is an exudate if one or more of the following citeria
are met.
Pleural fluid protein divided by serum protein >0.5
Pleural fluid lacato dehyoctogenase LDH divided by serum LDH >
0.6
1071. Common cause of death in a patient
      with chronic bronchieactasis is
 a) Right sided heart fail

 b) Infection

 c) Hemoptysis

 d) Carcinoma



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Right sided heart fail
In todays world, right sided heart failure in patients with diffuse long
standing bronchieactasis is a common cause of death in patients
with chronic bronchieactasis.
Pneumonia and hemorrhage are less common causes of death.
1072. Leutriene inhibitors are used in asthma
      for
 a) Monotherapy for acute attack

 b) Add-on therapy in patients not controlled by low dose inhaled
    glucocorticoids

 c) Status asthmaticus

 d) None of the above



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Add-on therapy in patients not controlled by low
dose inhaled glucocorticoids
Cysteinyl-leukotrienes are potent bronchoconstrictors, cause
microvascular leakage, and increase eosinophilic inflammation
through the activation of cys-LT1-receptors.
Lukotriene inhibitors such as montelukast and zafirlukast, block cys-
LT 1-receptors and provide modest clinical benefit in asthma.
They are less effective than inhaled corticosteroids in controlling
asthma and have less effect on airway inflammation, but are useful
as an add-on therapy in some patients not controlled with low doses
of inhaled corticosteroids.
1073. Apnea hypoapnea index indicating
      obstructive sleep apnea is -
 a) <1

 b) 2 - 5

 c) 5 - 8

 d) >8



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. <1
Normal preschool and school-age children generally have a total
AHI of less than 1.5 (obstructive AHI <1), and this is the most widely
used cutoff value for Obstructive Sleep Apnea in children 12 yr and
below; in older adolescents, the adult cutoff of an AHI 5 is generally
used.
1074. Multiple episodes of acute chest
      syndrome are associated with
 a) Asthma

 b) Bronchieactasis

 c) SLE

 d) Sjogrens syndrome



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Asthma
Patient presents with recurrent episodes of acute chest syndrome.
The characteristic symptoms during an episode of asthma are
wheezing, dyspnea, and coughing, which are variable, both
spontaneously and with therapy.
Prodromal symptoms may precede an attack, with itching under the
chin, discomfort between the scapulae, or inexplicable fear
(impending doom).
1075. Triad of skin lesions, mononeuritis
      multiplex, eosinophils seen in
 a) Alports syndrome

 b) Churg - Strauss syndrome

 c) Cryoglobulinemia

 d) Wegeners granulomatosus



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Cryoglobulinemia
Churg & Strauss is characterized by asthma, eosinophilla,
extravascular granuloma formation, vasculitis.
Clinical Features-Fever, malaise, anorexia, weight loss.
Mononeuritis multiplex is the second most common features.
Allergic rhinitis and sinusitis.
Asthma
Peripheral and tissue eosinophillia, extravascular necrotizing
granuloma.
1076. Chronic bronchitis is said to be present
      when patient has chronic cough
 a) 3 consecutive months in at least two consecutive years

 b) 2 consecutive months for 3 consecutive years

 c) 3 consecutive months in one year

 d) 1 month in a year for 2 consecutive years



Correct Answer - A
Answer-A. 3 consecutive months in at least 2 consecutive
years.
Cigarette smoking is the most important risk factor; air pollutants
also contribute.
The dominant pathologic features are mucus hypersecre- tion and
persistent inflammation.
Histologic examination demonstrates enlargement of mucous-
secreting glands, goblet cell hyperplasia, chronic inflammation, and
bronchiolar wall fibrosis.
1077. Brocks syndrome is due to which lobe
      of lung?
 a) Right middle lobe

 b) Right lower lobe

 c) Left upper lobe

 d) Left lower lobe



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Right middle lobe
Brocks syndrome is due to collapse of right middle lobe of lung. It is
seen as an acute complication of pulmonary tuberculosis. It occurs
secondary to hilar node involvement.
1078. Presence of Velcro crackles at the lung
      base on auscultation is a sign of
 a) Scleroderma

 b) Systemic Lupus

 c) Wegeners Granulomatosus

 d) Polyarteritisnodosa



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Scleroderma
CLINICAL FEATURES-
Skin- sclerodactyly, Ranaud’s phenomenon, calcinosis,
telangiectasia, skin thickening. (inadvance stage fingers become
claw like & face mask like)
Musculoskeletal features- Arthralgia, flexor tenosynovitis
GIT- oesophagitis, dysphagia, malabsorption
Cardiorespiratory features- pulmonary fibrosis, pulmonary
hypertension
Renal features- hypertensive renal crisis
Malignant hypertension
Physical examination may reveal "Velcro" crackles at the lung
bases.
1079. Feature of Acute severe Asthma include
      all of the following, Except:
a) Tachycardia > 120/min

b) Pulsus paradoxus

c) Respiratory acidosis

d) Drowsy



Correct Answer - A
Answer is A. Tachycardia > 120/min
Diaphoresis
Bradycardia
Paradoxical throcobadominal movements
PEER < 33%
Hypotension
Pulsus paradoxus
Hypercapnea
Silent chest
1080. Type IV respiratory failure occurs due
      to
 a) Alveolar flooding

 b) Inability to eliminate CO2

 c) Lung atelactasis

 d) Hypoperfusion of respiratory muscles



Correct Answer - D
Answer- d. Hypoperfusion of respiratory muscles
Type IV Respiratory Failure: results from hypoperfusion of
respiratory muscles in patients in shock.
Commonly caused by cardiogenic shock, septic shock and
hypovolemic shock.
1081. Type 3 respiratory failure occurs due to
      ?
 a) Post-operative atelectasis

 b) Kyphoscoliosis

 c) Flail chest

 d) Pulmonary fibrosis



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Post-operative atelectasis
1082. Tool/s which objectively asses the risk
      of adverse outcomes in a patient with
      pneumonia is/are
 a) Pneumonia severity index [PSI]

 b) CURB - 65 criteria

 c) Apachee Score

 d) Glasgow scale



Correct Answer - A:B
Answer- (A) Pneumonia severity index [PSI] (B) CURB - 65
criteria
Tools that objectively assess the risk of adverse outcomes are the
Pneumonia Severity Index (PSI), a prognostic model used to identify
patients at low risk of dying; and the CURB-65 criteria, a severity-of-
illness score.
The CURB-65 criteria include five variables: confusion (C); urea >7
mmol/L (U); respiratory rate 30/min (R); blood pressure, systolic "90
mmHg or diastolic" 60 mmHg (B); and age 65 years (65).
1083. Empyema necessitans is defined as so
      when ?
 a) Plural empyema is under pressure

 b) Pleural empyema has ruptured into bronchus

 c) Pleural empyema has ruptured into the pericardium

 d) Pleural empyema is showing extension to the subcutaneous
    tissue



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Pleural empyema is showing extension to the
subcutaneous tissue
1084. In ICU setting patients suffering from
      which respiratory pathology are at risk
      of CO2 narcosis?
 a) Pneumonia

 b) Asthma

 c) Emphysema

 d) Bronchieactasis



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Emphysema
Hypoventilation syndrome occurs most frequently in patients with a
history of chronic CO, retention who are receiving oxygen therapy
for emphysema or chronic pulmonary disease.
The elevated Paco, leading to CO, narcosis may have a direct
anesthetic effect, and cerebral vasodilation from increased Paco,
can lead to increased ICP
1085. Inspiratory squeaks are the physical
      examination finding of
 a) Bronchiolitis

 b) Pulmonary hypertension

 c) Pneumonia

 d) Pulmonary edema



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Bronchiolitis
ILD associated with inflammation but are less likely to be heard in
the granulomatous lung diseases.
Crackles may be present in the absence of radiographic
abnormalities on the chest radiograph.
Scattered late inspiratory high-pitched rhonchi—so-called inspiratory
squeaks—are heard in patients with bronchiolitis.
Cyanosis and clubbing of the digits occur in some patients with
advanced disease.
1086. Which of the following are the clinical
      abnormalities of uremia?
a) Hyperphosphatemia

b) Uremic frost

c) Peptic ulcer

d) All the above



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. All the above
Volume expasion (I)
Hyperkalemia (I)
Hyponatremia (1)
Hyperphosphatemia (I)
1087. Which type of Bartter's syndrome is
      associated with mutations in barttin?
 a) Type 1

 b) Type 2

 c) Type 3

 d) Type 4



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Type 4
Bartter's syndrome may result from mutations affecting any of five
ion transport proteins in the TAL.
The proteins affected include the apical loop diuretic-sensitive
sodium-potassium-chloride co-transporter NKCC2 (type 1), the
apical potassium channel ROMK (type 2), and the basolateral
chloride channel C1C-Kb (type 3).
Bartter's type 4 results from mutations in barttin, an essential subunit
of CIC-Ka and C1C-Kb that enables transport of the chloride
channels to the cell surface. Barttin is also expressed in the inner
ear; this accounts for the deafness invariably associated with
Bartter's type 4.
1088. Test used for screening for urinary tract
      infection is
 a) Nitrite test

 b) Na nitropruss ide test

 c) Paul Bunnel test

 d) Fentons test



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Nitrite Test
Effective and rapid method used for screening urine for the presence
of bacterial infection.
Test is based on the fact that most bacteria present in the urine,
have the capacity to reduce urine nitrate to nitrite.
1089. Patient with nephrotic syndrome has
      decreased amount of which antibody
 a) IgG

 b) IgE

 c) IgM

 d) IgA



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. IgG
The immunological abnormalities noted are very peculiar
IgG antibody is decrease
IgE and IgM antibody increase
Reduced responses to PHA and Con A (Concanavalin A)
Increase of beta microglobulinlevels
Reduced production of IL 2
Increased production of vascular permeability and
immunosuppressor factors by CD4 T cells and CD 8 T cells
respectively.
1090. RIFLE criteria is used for diagnosis of
 a) Acute kidney injury

 b) Acute splenic injury

 c) Acute liver injury

 d) Acute bowel injury



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Acute kidney injury
The RIFLE criteria, defines threes increasing levels of severity of
acute kidney injury on the basis of the increase in serum creatinine
concentration or decrease in urine output.
1091. What is oliguria -
 a) Excretion of less than 300m1 in 24 hrs

 b) Excretion of less than 500m1 in 24 hrs

 c) Excretion of less than 300 ml. in 12 hrs

 d) Excretion of less than 100 ml. in 24 hrs



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Excretion of less than 500 ml in 24 hrs
(Note that Bailey & Love 25/e p1279 (24/e p 1300 & 23/e p 1168)
write Oliguria to be less than 300 ml in 24 hrs, but we would follow
Harrison & CMDT; Note that Smith's Urology 17/e p531 (16/e, p538)
write it to < 400 ml/day!! what an utter confusion.)
1092. Hemodynamically important lesions of
      renal artery stenosis are predicted by
      renal artery velocities more than on
      Doppler ultrasound.
 a) 100 cm/s

 b) 125 cm/s

 c) 150 cm/s

 d) 200 cm/s



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. 200 cm/s
Renal artery velocities by Doppler ultrasound above 200 cm/s
generally predict hemodynamically important lesions (above 60%
vessel lumen occlusion), although treatment trials require velocity
above 300 cm/s to avoid false positives.
Renal resistive index has predictive value regarding the viability of
the kidney. It remains operator- and institution- dependent.
1093. Gitelman's syndrome resembles the
      effects of which of the following drugs?
 a) Thiazide

 b) Furosemide

 c) Spironolactone

 d) Amiloride



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Thiazide
Gitelman's syndrome is due to mutations in the thiazide-sensitive
Na-Cl co-transporter, NCCT, in the distal convoluted tubule (DCT).
Defects in NCCT in Gitelman's syndrome impair sodium and chloride
reabsorption in the DCT and thus resemble the effects of thiazide
diuretics. It remains unclear how this defect leads to severe
magnesium wasting.
1094. Autosomal  recessive polycystic kidney disease is characterised by the
      altered expression of:

 a) Polycystin

 b) Nephrocystin

 c) Uromodulin

 d) Fibrocystin



Correct Answer - D
Fibrocystin (polyductin) gene mutation is seen in autosomal recessive polycystic
kidney disease.

Note:
Polycystin mutation is associated with autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease.
Nephrocystin is related to nephronophthisis.
Uromodulin mutation is seen in medullary cystic kidney disease.
Ref: Harrisons principles of internal medicine, 18th edition, Page: 2356.
1095. Definition of complicated urinary tract
      infection is, the infection which fail to
      resolve or recur within week/s of
      standard therapy.
 a) 1 week

 b) 2 weeks

 c) 3 weeks

 d) 4 weeks



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. 2 weeks
Complicated urinary tract infections refers to the infections that fail to
resolve or recur within 2 weeks of standard therapy.
These are associated with bacteremia or sepsis and are assocated
with periurethral abscess, obstructions and pyelonephritis
1096. A patient presents with blunt trauma to
      abdomen. On investigations patient is
      found to have hepatic injury which has
      a ruptured subcapsular hematoma with
      active bleeding. What is the grade of
      liver injury?
 a) Grade I

 b) Grade II

 c) Grade III

 d) Grade IV



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Grade III
1097. Excellent predictor of mortality and
      morbidity in patients after hepatectomy
      is
 a) Serum lactate levels

 b) Serum magnesium level

 c) Serum iron level

 d) Serum copper level



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Serum lactate levels
Hyperlactemia and hypophosphatemia are common derangements
in patients undergoing liver resection.
Gluconeogenesis carried out by the liver normally consumes 40-
60% of lactate.
When the liver is damaged, stressed or resected, it produces lactate
rather than metabolizing it.
Due to the additive effects of lactate-containing intravenous solution,
non-lactate containing solutions are recommended for postoperative
use after hepatectomy.
1098. Portal hypertension is said to be
      present if portal venous pressure is
      more than:
      March 2010
 a) 3-5 mm Hg

 b) 5-8 mm Hg

 c) 10-12 mm Hg

 d) 15-20 mm Hg



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C: 10-12 mm Hg
Normal portal pressure is generally defined between 5 and 10 mm
Hg.
Portal hypertension results when the portal pressure rises to 12 mm
Hg or greater and complications can arise, such as varices and
ascites.
Many conditions are associated with portal hypertension, of which
cirrhosis is the most common cause
1099. All of the following drugs may be used
      in the treatment of ulcerative colitis
      Except:
 a) Corticosteroids

 b) Azathioprine

 c) Sulfasalazine

 d) Methotrexate



Correct Answer - D
Answer is D (Methotrexate)
Methotrexate has not been shown to be effective fbr treating active
ulcerative colitis or for maintaining remission.
1100. Ascitic fluid SAAG < 1.1 what is the
      disease associated with
a) Hepatic failure

b) Idiopathic portal fibrosis

c) Constrictive pericarditis

d) Peritoneal carcinomatosis



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Peritoneal carcinomatosis
Low albumin gradient (SAAG <1.1 g/dL)
Peritoneal carcinomatosis
Peritoneal tuberculosis
Pancreatitis
Serositis
Nephrotic syndrome
1101. Specific antibody associated with
      primary biliary cirrhosis is:
 a) Anti-myosin

 b) Anti-nuclear

 c) Anti-mitochondrial

 d) Anti-endomysial



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C: Anti-mitochondrial
Primary biliary cirrhosis is strongly associated with the presence of
anti-mitochondrial antibodies (AMA), which are diagnostic
PBC:
* Associated with CREST syndrome, sicca syndrome, auto-immune
thyroiditis, type I DM and IgA deficiency
* IgG AMA is detected in more than 90% of patients with PBC
* 90% of women are between 35 - 60 years
* Earliest symptom is pruritis
* Eventually hepatocellular failure and portal hypertension develops
* Lab findings:
  - Increased serum alkaline phosphatase
  - Increased serum 5-nucleotidase activity
  - Increased gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase
  - Serum bilirubin is usually normal
  - Aminotransferase levels minimally increased
  - Treatment: Ursodiol
1102. Gene associated with the development
      of Peutz-Jeghers syndrome is
 a) STK 11

 b) PTEN

 c) KRAS

 d) BRCA 1



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. STK 11
Germline heterozygous loss-of-function mutations in the gene STKil
are present in approximately half of individuals with familial Peutz-
Jeghers syndrome as well as a subset of patients with sporadic
Peutz-Jeghers syndrome.
1103. Which of the following is not true about
                   amoebiasis?
 a) ALA in 10% causes in tropics

 b) Portal system efficient filter

 c) Abscess due to suppuration

 d) Abscess wall good for culture



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Abscess due to suppuration
Amebic liver abscess
Pus in amoebic liver abscess is not due to suppuration, but is a
mixture of sloughed liver tissue and blood.
It is chocolate brown in colour and thick in consistency (anchovy
sauce pus)
In the tropics 2-10% of the individuals infected with entamoeba
histolytica suffer from hepatic complications. The trophozoites are
carried from the large intestine to the liver by portal vein. In the liver
the capillary system acts as efficient filter and holds these parasites.
In case of amoebic liver abscess the diagnostic aspiration is done
from the abscess wall because the trophozoites are confined to the
periphery.
1104. Right hand dominant patient presents
      with normal comprehension but speaks
      with short utterances of a few words at
      a time, comprised mostly of nouns.
      What is the most probable location of
      the lesion
 a) Left inferior frontal gyrus

 b) Right inferior frontal gyrus

 c) Left superior temporal gyrus

 d) Right superior temporal gyrus



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Left inferior frontal gyrus
Patient has normal comprehension but speaks with short utterances
of a few words at a time, comprised mostly of nouns. These findings
are suggestive of brocas aphsia. It is seen in patients having
affection of the inferior frontal gyrus of the dominant hemisphere.
The patient is right handed so the left hemisphere, will the dominant
one. Thus most probable location of the lesion is left inferior frontal
gyrus.
1105. Pure word deafness is associated with
 a) Middle cerebral artery stroke

 b) Posterior cerebral artery stroke

 c) Vertebral artery aneurysm

 d) Basilar artery aneurysm



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Middle cerebral artery stroke
The most common causes are either bilateral or left-sided middle
cerebral artery (MCA) strokes affecting the superior temporal gyrus.
The net effect of the underlying lesion is to interrupt the flow of
information from the auditory association cortex to Wernicke's area.
1106. Global aphasia is seen due to
 a) Strokes involving entire middle cerebral artery distribution in left
    hemisphere

 b) Strokes involving entire middle cerebral artery distribution in
    right hemisphere

 c) Strokes involving entire posterior cerebral artery distribution in
    left hemisphere

 d) Strokes involving entire posterior cerebral artery distribution in
    right hemisphere



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Strokes involving entire middle cerebral artery
distribution in left hemisphere
This syndrome represents the combined dysfunction of Broca's and
Wernicke's areas and usually results from strokes that involve the
entire middle cerebral artery distribution in the left hemisphere.
Related signs include right hemiplegia, hemisensory loss, and
homonymous hemianopia.
1107. Lambert Eaton syndrome true is
 a) It is a paraneoplastic syndrome associated with squamous cell
    carcinoma of lung

 b) IgM antibodies against ligand gated calcium channels

 c) There is increase in release of presynaptic acetylcholine

 d) With continuous stimulation there is marked increase in
    amplitude of action potentials.



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. With continuous stimulation there is marked
increase in amplitude of action potentials.
It is a paraneoplastic syndrome associated with cancer particularly
small cell Ca of lung.
It is a disorder of neuromuscular junction transmission (Presynaptic)
These IgG autoantibodies against the voltage sensitive calcium
channels reduce the number of functioning channels.
This causes decrease in release of presynaptic acetylcholine.
Symptoms
Muscles of the trunk shoulder girdle, pelvic girdle and muscles of
lower extremities (muscles of the proximal leg are the most
commonly involved muscles)
Often the first symptoms are difficulty in arising from a chair,
climbing stairs and walking, the shoulder muscles are affected later
on.
1108. Which is not seen in Alzheimers
      disease
 a) Gradual development of forgetfulness

 b) Defective visuospatial orientation

 c) Depression

 d) Sequence of neurological abnormalities follows a described
    order



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Sequence of neurological abnormalities follows a
described order
The sequence of neurological disabilities may not follow any
described order and one or another deficit may take preceedence
but usually the disease preceedes in the following four observed
patterns.
1) Korsakoff amnestic state
2) Dysnomia
3) Visuospatial orientation becomes defective
4) Paranoia and other personality changes
1109. Which lobe is affected in the early
      course of alzheimers disease
 a) Frontal lobe

 b) Parietal lobe

 c) Medial temporal lobe

 d) Lateral temporal lobe



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Medial temporal lobe
Structures of the medial temporal lobe, including hippocampus,
entorhinal cortex and amygdala, are involved early in the course and
are usually severely atrophied in the later stages.
1110. Which is/are the usual first
      deformity/ies to be seen in CMT
      disease?
 a) Pes cavus

 b) Club hand

 c) Mannus valgus

 d) Flexion deformity of knee



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Pes cavus
Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT) disease is the most common type of
hereditary neuropathy.
There is progressive muscle weakness and atrophy that usually
begins in the first two decades of life.
The first signs of the disease are usually pes cavus, foot deformities
and scoliosis.
There is slowly progressive weakness and wasting, first of the feet
and legs and then of the hands.
The most common form of CMT is type 1, a demyelinating
neuropathy with autosomal dominant inheritance, mapped most
commonly to the short arm of chromosome 17.
1111. Huntingtons disease is commonly seen
      in age group between
 a) 15 - 35 years

 b) 25 - 45 years

 c) 35 - 55 years

 d) 45 - 65 years



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. 25 - 45 years
HD is a progressive, fatal, highly penetrant autosomal dominant
disorder characterized by motor, behavioral, and cognitive
dysfunction.
Onset is typically between the ages of 25 and 45 years (range, 3-70
years) with a prevalence of 2-8 cases per 100,000 and an average
age at death of 60 years.
Huntigton's disease is characterized by triad of
Autosomal dominant inheritence
Choreoathetosis
Dementia
1112. Which cranial nerve is involved in
      Weber syndrome?
 a) II

 b) III

 c) IV

 d) V



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. III
Weber's syndrome- Midbrain- Oculomotor nerve- Ipsilateral third-
nerve palsy
1113. Violent abnormal flinging movements
      which are irregular and affecting one
      side are called as -
 a) Chorea

 b) Athetosis

 c) Dystonia

 d) Hemiballismus



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Hemiballismus
It is defined as the dysfunction in the implementation of appropriate
targeting and velocity of intended movements, dysfunction of
posture and abnormal involuntary movement, or the performance of
normal appearing movements at inappropriate or unintended times.
1114. Wernickes encephalopathy develops
      secondary to accumulation of which
      substrate?
 a) Glutamate

 b) Aspartate

 c) Lactate

 d) Acetate



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Glutamate
Glutamate accumulates owing to impairment of a ketoglutamate
dehydrogenase activity and in combination with energy deficiency
may result in excitotoxic cell damage.
1115. Which of the following clinical test
      when positive suggests presence of
      sensory ataxia?
 a) Romberg test

 b) Adson test

 c) Stinchfield test

 d) Crossed SLR test



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Romberg test
The Romberg test is a test of the body's sense of positioning
(proprioception), which requires healthy functioning of the dorsal
columns of the spinal cord.
The Romberg test is used to investigate the cause of loss of motor
coordination (ataxia).
A positive Romberg test suggests that the ataxia is sensory in
nature, that is, depending on loss of proprioception.
1116. Todds paralysis is experience following
      episode of
 a) Focal seizure

 b) Generalised seizure

 c) After correction of hyponatremia

 d) After correction of hypokalemia



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Focal seizure
Focal seizures arise from a neuronal network either discretely
localized within one cerebral hemisphere.
The routine interictal (i.e., between seizures) electroencephalogram
(EEG) in patients with focal seizures is often normal or may show
brief discharges termed epileptiform spikes, or sharp waves.
Second, patients may experience a localized paresis (Todd's
paralysis) for minutes to many hours in the involved region following
the seizure.
1117. Cerebro-occulo-genital syndrome has
      the following features except
 a) Microcephaly

 b) Short stature

 c) Agenesis of corpus callosum

 d) Flaccid quadriplegia



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Flaccid quadriplegia
Cerebro-occulo-genital syndrome is associated with microcephaly,
short stature, microophthalmia, agenesis of corpus callosum,
hypospadias and spastic quadriplegia.
1118. Frontal lobe syndrome consists
 a) Euphoria

 b) Indifference

 c) Irritability

 d) All the above



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. All the above
Euphoria, indifference, disinhibition, and irritability are consequences
of frontal lobe lesions. These emotional and behavioural
disturbances are usually referred to as frontal lobe syndrome.
Other features are decreased social concern, jocularity,
facetiousness, coarseness, hyperkinesia, disinhibition, loss of social
graces, inappropriate sexual advances, sexual exhibitionism,
impulsiveness, restlessness, and grandiose delusions.
1119. Flapping tremors are not seen in
 a) CO2 toxicity

 b) Hypomagnesemia

 c) Subarachnoid hemorrhage

 d) Carbolic acid poisoning



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Carbolic acid poisoning
It is an important clinical sign
It is not pathognomonic of any condition but it gives clue to serious
underlying disease process.
Flapping tremor is a motor disturbance marked by intermettent
lapses of an assumed posture as a result of intermittency of
sustained contraction of group of muscles.
1120. Features which differentiate seizures
      from syncope include the following
      except
a) No immediate precipitating factors like stress, valsalva,
   orthostatic hypotension

b) Immediate transition to unconciousness

c) Presence of cyanosis and frothing of mouth

d) Presence of premonitory symptoms like diaphoresis and
   tunneling of vision



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Presence of premonitory symptoms like diaphoresis
and tunneling of vision
1121. Fine tremors are found in which
      disorder
 a) Mercury poisoning

 b) Excess smoking

 c) Hypoglycemia

 d) All the above



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. All the above
Fine tremors are noted when a limb is held in an antigravity posture
They are noted in situations of catecholamine excess such as
anxiety states, thyrotoxicosis, hypoglycemia and in alcoholism and
excess smoking.
They are also noted after ingestion of drugs like caffeine,
salbutamol, theophylline, amphetamine, tricyclic antidepressants,
Lithium, valproate, steroids, and in mercury poisoning.
1122. True about electrophoresis in patients
      of multiple myeloma
 a) M component spike is for the alpha globulins

 b) Monoclonal antibody must be present at a concentration of at
    least 10 g/L [1.0 g/dL] to be accurately quantitated by
    electrophoresis

 c) M component is IgM in 53% of the patients

 d) M component is IgA in 25% of the patients



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. M component is IgA in 25% of the patients
The immunoglobulins move heterogeneously in an electric field and
form a broad peak in the gamma region. The y globulin region of the
electrophoretic pattern is usually increased in the sera of patients
with plasma cell tumors. There is a sharp spike in this region called
an M component (M for monoclonal).
The serum M component in multiple myeloma will be IgG in 53% of
patients, IgA in 25%, and IgD in 1%; 20% ofMietits will have only
light chains in serum and urine.
1123. All but one is true for beta thalassemia
      major
a) Growth and development is impaired

b) Red cell count <4 x 10'2/L

c) Levels of HbA2 < 3.5%

d) Bone marrow iron is depleted



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Bone marrow iron is depleted
Anaemia Hb gm/dl- < 7 (severe)
Increased HbF, HbA2 and absence of HbA.
Severity of disease  ++++
Growth and development     impaired
Splenomegaly ++++
Skeletal changes     +++
Thalassemia facies
B.M. Iron- decreased
1124. Immune thrombocytopenic puprpura
      associated with
 a) Hepatitis A infection

 b) Hepatitis B infection

 c) Hepatitis C infection

 d) Hepatitis D infection



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Hepatitis C infection
Immune thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP; also termed idiopathic
thrombocytopenic purpura) is an acquired disorder in which there is
immune-mediated destruction of platelets and possibly inhibition of
platelet release from the megakaryocyte.
ITP is termed secondary if it is associated with an underlying
disorder; autoimmune disorders, particularly systemic lupus
erythematosus (SLE), and infections, such as HIV and hepatitis C,
are common causes.
1125. Which of the following is not a cause of
      secondary Idiopathic thrombocytopenic
      purpura?
 a) Systemic lupus erythmatosus

 b) Hepatitis C infection

 c) Rheumatoid arthritis

 d) HIV infection



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Rheumatoid arthritis
ITP is termed secondary if it is associated with an underlying
disorder; autoimmune disorders, particularly systemic lupus
erythematosus (SLE), and infections, such as HIV and hepatitis C,
are common causes.
1126. Drug/s used in management relapsed
      multiple myeloma is
 a) Bortezomib

 b) Lenalidomide

 c) Doxorubicin

 d) All the above



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. All the above
The combination of bortezomib and liposomal doxorubicin is active
in relapsed myeloma.
Thalidomide, if not used as initial therapy, can achieve responses in
refractory cases.
High-dose melphalan and stem cell transplant, if not used earlier,
also have activity in patients with refractory disease.
1127. Treatment of chronic phase of CML in
      pregnant women is -
 a) Imatinib

 b) Leukapheresis

 c) Spleenectomy

 d) Interferon therapy



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Leukapheresis
Intensive leukapheresis may control the blood counts in chronic-
phase CML; however, it is expensive and cumbersome.
It is useful in emergencies where leukostasis-related complications
such as pulmonary failure or cerebrovascular accidents are likely.
Splenectomy was used in CML in the past because of the
suggestion that evolution to the acute phase might occur in the
spleen.
Splenic radiation is used rarely to reduce the size of the spleen.
1128. Which of the following drug/s can be
      used for immediate parenteral
      anticoagulation in patients with venous
      thromboembolism?
 a) Unfractioned heparin

 b) Low molecular weight heparin

 c) Fondaparinux

 d) All the above



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D.�All the above
Immediately effective anticoagulation is initiated with a parenteral
drug: unfractionated heparin (UFH), low-molecular-weight heparin
(LMWH), or fondaparinux.
One should use a direct thrombin inhibitor�argatroban, lepirudin, or
bivalirudin�in patients with proven or suspected heparin-induced
thrombocytopenia.
Warfarin requires 5-7 days to achieve a therapeutic effect.
1129. A patient presents with icterus, but
      there is no evidence of bilirubin in
      urine. What is the most likely cause of
      jaundice in this patient?
 a) Hemolysis

 b) Gall stones

 c) Carcinoma head of pancreas

 d) Biliary atresia



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Hemolysis
Hemolysis and hyperbilirubinemia
Increased destruction of erythrocytes leads to increased bilirubin
turnover and unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia; the
hyperbilirubinemia is usually modest in the presence of normal liver
function.
Therefore, hemolysis alone cannot result in a sustained
hyperbilirubinemia of more than -68 umol/L (4 mg/dL).
When hemolysis is the only abnormality in an otherwise healthy
individual, the result is a purely unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia.
1130. True about sideroblastic anemia
 a) Severity of the disease depends on the residual erythroid ALA
    synthase activity

 b) Prussian blue staining sideroblasts are observed

 c) Pyridoxine supplementation can be used for treatment

 d) All the above



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. All the above
XLSA results from the deficient activity of the erythroid form of ALA-
synthase and is associated with ineffective erythropoiesis,
weakness, and pallor.
Typically, males with XLSA develop refractory hemolytic anemia,
pallor, and weakness during infancy.
Peripheral blood smears reveal a hypochromic, microcytic anemia
with striking anisocytosis, poikilocytosis, and polychromasia; the
leukocytes and platelets appear normal.
A variety of Prussian blue-staining sideroblasts are observed. Levels
of urinary porphyrin precursors and of both urinary and fecal
porphyrins are normal.
1131. Massive transfusion is defined as
      transfusion of
 a) 10/ 24 or more red cell products in hours.

 b) 5/12 or more red cell products in hours.

 c) 10/48 or more red cell products in hours.

 d) 5/24or more red cell products in hours.



Correct Answer - A
Answer: A 10/ 24 or more red cell products in hours.
Various definitions of massive blood transfusion (MBT) have been
published in the medical literature such as:
Replacement of one entire blood volume within 24 h
Transfusion of >10 units of packed red blood cells (PRBCs) in 24 h
Transfusion of >4 units of PRBCs in 1 h when on-going need is
foreseeable
1132. Which is the most common cause of
      thrombocytopenia in an ICU patient?
 a) Sepsis

 b) Bone marrow failure

 c) ITP

 d) Drug induced



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Sepsis
Thrombocytopenia is a common laboratory abnormality that has
been associated with adverse outcomes in ICU patients.
Thrombocytopenia is defined as platelet count < 150 X 103 cells /
mcL.
Common causes of thrombocytopenia in ICU patients:
Sepsis
Disseminated intravascular coagulation
Consumption (eg, major trauma, cardiopulmonary bypass)
Dilution (with massive transfusion)
Myelosuppressive chemotherapy
Mechanical circulatory support devices (eg, intra-aortic balloon
pump)
Less common but important causes of thrombocytopenia that should
not be missed:
Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia
Hemophagocytic syndrome
Uncommon causes of thrombocytopenia that develop during ICU
admission
Drug-induced thrombocytopenia (other than heparin or cytotoxic
chemotherapy)
Leukemia, myelodysplasia, aplastic anemia, etc, unless
abnormalities were already present before ICU admission
1133. What percentage of Multiple myeloma
      patients have vertebral involvement?
a) 22%

b) 44%

c) 66%

d) 88%



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. 66%
Bone lesions are most common in the vertebral column. The
following distribution was seen in a large series of cases:
Vertebral column → 66%
Ribs- 44%
Skull → 4%
Pelvis → 28%
Femur → 28%
Clavicle → 10%
1134. Multiagent chemotherapy induces
      remission in of the patients of acute
      myelogenous leukemia
 a) 65 - 70

 b) 75 - 80

 c) 85 - 90

 d) 95 - 100



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C.�85 - 90
Aggressive multiagent chemotherapy is successful in inducing
remission in approximately 85-90% of patients.
Prognostic features [t(8;21); t(15;17); inv(16); APL] and improved
outcome with chemotherapy, matched sibling stem cell
transplantation is recommended only after a relapse
Matched-sibling bone marrow or stem cell transplantation after
remission achieves long-term disease-free survival in about two
thirds of patients.
1135. In case of hypothyroidism which
      investigation is most informative and
      most commonly used ?
 a) Serum TSH Level

 b) Serum T3, T4 Level

 c) Serum Calcitonin assay

 d) Serum T3 level



Correct Answer - A
Ans is A ie Serum TSH Level
"A normal TSH Level excludes primary (but not secondary)
hypothyrodism. If the TSH is elevated a free T4 level is needed to
confirm the presence of clinical hypothyrodism, but free T4 is inferior
to TSH when used as a screening test, as it will not detect
subclinical or mild hypothyroidism. Circulating free T3 levels are
normal in about 25% of the patients, reflecting adaptive respose to
hypothyroidism. T3 measurements are therefore not indicated." -
Harrison
"Among the various available serum thyroid function tests, TSH is
the most useful to assess gland dysfunction." ?
Endocrine Surgery of Head & Neck, p 83.
1136. HbA1c control for how much time
 a) 2 -3 weeks

 b) 3 - 6 weeks

 c) 6 - 8 weeks

 d) 14 - 18 weeks



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. 6 - 8 weeks
The half-life of an erythrocyte is typically 60 days, the level of
glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c) reflects the mean blood glucose
concentration over the preceding 6-8 weeks.
1137. HbA1C criteria for a patient to be
      diagnosed with diabetes mellitus is
a) >4.5%

b) >5.5%

c) >6.5%

d) >7.5%



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. >6.5%
Fasting plasma glucose > (126 mg/dl)
Two hour plasma glucose > (200mg/d1) during an oral GTT
A/C > 6.5%
1138. All are seen in MEN IIA syndrome
      except
 a) Medullary carcinoma of thyroid is seen in 100% of the patients

 b) 40 - 30% patients have phaeochromocytoms

 c) Caused by loss of function mutation in IIRT protooncogene

 d) Primary hyperparathyroidism is the most variable feature of
    MEN II A syndrome



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Caused by loss of function mutation in IIRT
protooncogene
MEN-2A or Sipple syndrome, is characterized by
pheochromocytoma, medullary carcinoma of the thyroid, and
parathyroid hyperplasia.
Parathyroid hyperplasia and evidence of hypercalcemia or renal
stones.
MEN-2A is clinically and genetically distinct from MEN-I and is
caused by germline gain-of-function mutations in the
RET proto-oncogene on chromosome l0qll.2.
40% to 50% have pheochromocytomas.
Primary hyperparathyroidism is the most variable feature of MEN 2A
syndrome.
1139. Which of the following is not true about
      the development of thyroid tumors in
      nodular goiter?
 a) Prevalence of thyroid carcinoma ranges between 5-15% in the
    patients with multinodular goiter

 b) Papillary carcinoma is the most common carcinoma developed
    in patients with nodular goiter

 c) Both benign and malignant neoplasms can be seen in patients
    with nodular goiter

 d) The risk of development of carcinoma is not correlated with the
    level of TSH



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. The risk of development of carcinoma is not
correlated with the level of TSH
Thyroid tumors both benign and malignant can be seen in colloid
goiter with both solitary and multiple nodules.
The prevalence of thyroid carcinoma ranges from 5 – 15% in
multinodular goiter and 8 – 17% in solitary colloid nodules.
The prevalence in higher in men compared to women and usually
occurs in older age group.
The most common malignant tumor arising in mutinodular goiter is
papillary carcinoma. Other like follicular carcinoma, hurthle cell
carcinoma and medullary carcinoma are also encountered
1140. Tertiary hyperparathyroidism is-
 a) High PO4 level with metastasis

 b) Secondary hyperparathyroidism with CRF

 c) Primary hyperparathyroidism with low Ca" levels

 d) Secondary hyperparathyroidism with chief cell adenoma



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Secondary hyperparathyroidism with chief cell
adenoma
Davidson states "In very small proportion of cases of secondary
hyperparathyroidism continuous stimulation of the parathyroid may
result in adenoma formation and autonomous PTH secretion. This is
known as tertiary hyperparathyroidism".
1141. Indication for giving liothyronine as
      therapeutic management is
 a) Resistant depression

 b) Social phobia

 c) Alzheimers disease

 d) Cataplexy



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Resistant depression
It is the synthetic levorotatory isomer of triiodothyronine (T3).
Liothyronine is the most broadly used thyroid hormone for treatment
of depression.
Liothyronine is used to accelerate the response to tricyclic
antidepressants particularly in women.
It is known to augment response to antidepressants in patients with
mood disorders, in those who failed to respond to a tricyclic
antidepressant trialie. In patients with resistant depression.
1142. Medical management of
      hyperparathyroidism includes which of
      the following?
 a) Bisphosphonates

 b) Calcitonin

 c) Plicamycin

 d) All the above



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. All the above
Expansion of intravascular volume, administration of loop diuretics,
pharmacotherapy which reduces osteoclastic bone resorption (like
Bisphosphonates, Calcitonin, and Plicamycin) are useful in the
medical management of hyperparathyroidism.
1143. Which of the following causes of
      hypercalcemia is not associated with
      high bone turnover?
 a) Hyperthyroidism

 b) Vitamin A intoxication

 c) Vitamin D intoxication

 d) Thiazides



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Vitamin D intoxication
Vitamin D related
Vitamin D intoxication
Increased 1, 25 (OH)2D eg. Sarcoidosis
Idiopathic hypercalcemia of infancy
Associated high bone turnover
Hyperthyroidism
Immobilization
Thiazides
Vitamin A intoxication
1144. Fasting hypoglycemia is caused by the
      following except
 a) Alcohol intake

 b) Pentamidine therapy

 c) Renal insufficiency

 d) Chronic pancreatitis



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Chronic pancreatitis
Inappropriate (High) Insulin Level
Insulin reaction in patients with diabetes - This is the most common
cause of hypoglycemia, due to an imbalance between insulin supply
and insulin requirements.
Insulin secretagogue overdose in type 2 diabetes patients - Insulin
secretagogues are oral hypoglycemic agents that work by
stimulating insulin release from beta islet cells and, herefore, have
the potential to cause hypoglycemia. Sulfonylureas
(the most commonly prescribed type of these medications) are
cleared by the kidney, so elderly patients with compromised renal
function are at risk for developing hypoglycemia while on these
agents.
Factitious hypoglycemia (self induced or inadvertent)
Autoimmune hypoglycemia
Pentamidine - Pentamidine used for treatment/prophylaxis of PCP in
patients with AIDS can cause hypoglycemia by direct injury to the
beta islet cells causing hyperinsulinemia.
Excess Insulin Secretion (Insulinoma)
1145. Diabetes insipidus is said to be present
      when
 a) > 30ml/hr urine output in 24 hrs and < 260 mosml/L osmolarity

 b) > 40ml/hr urine output in 24 hrs and < 280 mosml/L osmolarity

 c) > 50ml/hr urine output in 24 hrs and < 300 mosml/L osmolarity

 d) > 60ml/hr urine output in 24 hrs and < 320 mosml/L osmolarity



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. > 50ml/hr urine output in 24 hrs and < 300 mosml/L
osmolarity
Decreased secretion or action of arginine vasopressin usually
manifests as diabetes insipidus, a syndrome characterized by the
production of abnormally large volumes of dilute urine.
DI must be differentiated from other etiology of polyuria.
The test should be started in the morning with careful supervision to
avoid dehydration.
Bodyweight, plasma osmolality, serum sodium, and urine volume
and osmolality should be measured hourly.
The test should be stopped when body weight decreases by 5% or
plasma osmolality/sodium exceed the upper limit of normal.
The 24-hour urine volume is >50 ml/kg body weight or urine
osmolality
Measurement of AVP levels before and after fluid deprivation may
be helpful to distinguish central and nephrogenic DI.
Occasionally, hypertonic saline infusion may be required if fluid
deprivation does not achieve the requisite level of hypertonic
dehydration, but this should be administered with caution.
1146. Chronic adrenal insufficiency is caused
      by the following organisms except
 a) Mycobacterium tubercle

 b) Histoplasma capsulatum

 c) Coccidioides immitis

 d) Mycobacterium bovis



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Mycobacterium bovis
Infections, particularly tuberculosis and those produced by fungi,
cause primary chronic adrenocortical insufficiency.
When present, tuberculous adrenalitis is usually associated with
active infection in other sites, particularly in the lungs and
genitourinary
AIDS sufferers are at risk for developing adrenal insufficiency from
several infectious (cytomegalovirus, Mycobacterium
aviumintracellulare) and noninfectious (Kaposi sarcoma)
complications.
1147. Which of the following is not a feature
      of myxedema coma?
 a) Reduced level of consciousness and seizures with other
    features of hypothyroidism is seen

 b) Hypoventilation leading to hypoxia and hypercapnia

 c) Levothyroxine can be given via intravenous and nasogastric
    route

 d) Levothyroxine should not be used in the management



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Levothyroxine should not be used in the
management
Myxedema coma is defined as severe hypothyroidism leading to
decreased mental status, hypothermia, and other symptoms of
hypothyroidism.
Reduced level of consciousness, sometimes associated with
seizures may also be seen.
Factors that predispose to myxedema coma include cold exposure,
trauma, infection, and administration of narcotics.
Therapy for myxedema coma should include levothyroxine (500 μg)
as a single IV bolus followed by daily treatment with levothyroxine
(50–100 μg/d), along with hydrocortisone (50 mg every 6 h) for
impaired adrenal reserve, ventilatory support, space blankets, and
treatment of precipitating factors.
1148. Acute adrenal insufficiency can present
      as
 a) Acute abdomen with abdominal tenderness, nausea,vomiting
    and fever

 b) Neurologic disease with decreased responsiveness progressing
    to stupor and coma

 c) Hypovolemic shock

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. All of the above
Postural hypotension may progress to hypovolemic shock.
Adrenal insufficiency may mimic features of acute abdomen with
abdominal tenderness, nausea, vomiting, and fever.
In some cases, the primary presentation may resemble neurologic
disease, with decreased responsiveness, progressing to stupor and
coma.
An adrenal crisis can be triggered by an intercurrent illness, surgical
or other stress, or increased glucocorticoid inactivation (e.g.,
hyperthyroidism).
1149. The gold standard test for diagnosis of
      Insulinoma is:
 a) '72 hour' fast test

 b) Plasma Glucose levels < 3 mmol/l

 c) Plasma Insulin levels > 6µU/ml

 d) C- peptide levels < 50 p mol/e



Correct Answer - A
The answer is A ('72 hour' fast test):
The Gold standard test for diagnosis of Insulinoma is a supervised
'72 hour fast' test
Diagnosis of insulinoma requires demonstration of inappropriately
high levels of plasma Insulin ( and C- peptide) in the presence of
documented hypoglycemia (Achieved by 72-hour fast test).
Absolute values of Insulin or C- peptide are not reliable in
establishing a diagnosis unless hypoglycemia is documented The
'72 hour fast test' allows demonstration of hypoglycemia, together
will elevated levels of Insulin and C-peptide and thus becomes the
most reliable – gold standard test for establishing a diagnosis of
Insulinoma
Diagnosis of Insulinoma: '72 hour fast' test
The diagnosis of Insulinoma requires the demonstration of an
inappropriately elevated plasma insulin (and C-peptide) at the time
of hypoglycemia.
The '72 hour fast' test involves supervised fasting for up to 72 hours
or until hypoglycemia can be documented.
The test is considered positive if at any time when blood glucose
levels drop to < 2.2mmo1/1 (40 mg/dl), the serum insulin levels are
recorded to be greater than 6µU/ml. (and C- peptide levels > 100
pmo1/1)
Studies indicate that 100% of patients with insulinoma will be
detected after a supervised 72 hour fast and hence this test is
considered the gold standard test.
First 24 hours:     70-80% of patients with insulinoma can be
detected
Up to 48 hours:      98% of patients with insulinoma can be
detected
By 72 hours:          100% of patients with insulinoma can he
detected
1150. Hypotonic solution given to correct
 a) Dehydration secondary to diuretic therapy

 b) Diabetic ketoacidosis

 c) Hyperosmolar, hyperglycemic nonketotic syndrome

 d) All the above



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. All the above
Hypotonic solution has osmolarity lower than seum osmolarity.
When a patient receives hypotonic solution, fluid shifts out of the
blood vessels and into the cells and interstitial spaces, where
osmolarity is higher.
Hypotonic solution hydrates cells while reducing fluid in the
circulatory system.
Indications
Dehydration secondary to diuretic therapy.
Diabetic ketoacidosis
Hyperosmolar, hyperglycemic nonketotic syndrome
Examples of hypotonic solutions: half normal saline, 0.33% sodium
chloride, dextrose 2.5% in water, dextrose 2.5%.
1151. All of the following are causes of acute
      hyponatremia except
 a) Glycine irrigation in TURP

 b) Recent institution of thiazide therapy

 c) MDMA ingestion

 d) Liquorice ingestion



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Liquorice ingestion
causes of hyponatremia
Iatrogenic
Postoperative: premenopausal women
Hypotonic fluids with causes of 1' vasopressin
Glycine irrigation: TURP, uterine surgery
Colonoscopy preparation
Recent institution of thiazides
Polydipsia MDMA ingestion
Exercise-induced
Multifactorial, e.g., thiazide and polydipsia
1152. Acute hyponatremia becomes
      symptomatic at
 a) < 135 mEq

 b) < 125 mEq

 c) < 120 mEq

 d) < 110 mEq



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., < 125 mEq
Serum level of sodium at which symptoms develop
Acute < 125 meq/L
Chronic < 120 meq/L
Hyponatremia is commonly defined as a serum sodium < 135
mmol/L (< 135 mEq/L). Neurological symptoms
occur at different levels of low sodium, depending not only on the
absolute value but also on the rate of fall.
In patients with hyponatremia that develops over hours, life-
threatening seizures and cerebral edema may occur
at values as high as 125 mmol/L.
In contrast, some patients with more chronic hyponatremia that has
slowly developed over months to years may be asymptomatic even
with serum levels < 110 mmol.
Acute or hvperacute hvponatremia
The hyponatremia developed within the previous 24 hours, it is
called "acute."
If the hyponatremia developed over just a few hours due to a
marked increase in water intake (self-induced water intoxication, as
may be seen in marathon runners, psychotic patients, and users of
ecstasy), it is called "hyperacute."
Chronic hyponatremia
If it is known that the hyponatremia has been presentfbr more than
48 hours, or if the duration is unknown (such as in patients who
develop hyponatremia at home), it is called "chronic."
Mild to moderate hyponatremia
Mild hyponatremia is usually defined as a serum sodium
concentration between 130 and 135 meq/L.
Moderate hyponatremia is often defined as a serum sodium
concentration between 121 and 129 meq/L.
Severe hvponatremia
Severe hyponatremia can be defined as a serum sodium of 120
meq/L or less.
Symptoms of hvponatremia
Absent symptoms
Patients with hyponatremia are frequently asymptomatic, particularly
if the hyponatremia is chronic and of mild or moderate severity (ie,
serum sodium >120 meq/L).
However, such patients may have subclinical impairments in
mentation and gait.
Mild to moderate symptoms
Mild to moderate symptoms of hyponatremia are relatively
nonspecific and include headache, nausea, vomiting, fatigue, gait
disturbances, and confusion.
In patients with chronic hyponatremia (ie, >48 hours duration), these
findings are not associated with impending herniation; however, in
patients with more acute hyponatremia, such symptoms should be
considered ominous and may evolve without warning to seizures,
respiratory arrest, and herniation.
Severe symptoms
Severe symptoms of hyponatremia include
u Seizures
Obtundation
Coma
Respiratory arrest.
1153. Respiratory acidosis is recognized
      primarily by increase in
 a) Pa02

 b) PaCO2

 c) HCO3

 d) None of the above



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. PaCO2
Respiratory acidosis occurs when there is accumulation of CO2 due
to type II respiratory failure.it can also occur due to severe
pulmonary disease, respiratory muscle fatigue, or abnormalities in
ventilatory control and is recognized by an increase in Paco2 and
decrease in pH
This results in a rise in the PCO2, with a compensatory increase in
plasma bicarbonate concentration, particularly when the disorder is
of long duration and the kidney has fully developed its capacity for
increased acid excretion
1154. Which of the following drug
      administration is not associated with
      hypomagnesemia?
 a) Cisplatin

 b) Valproate

 c) Foscarnet

 d) Cetuximab



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Valproate
Drugs causing hypomagnesemia
Ethanol
Diuretics (loop, thiazide, osmotic)
Cisplatin
Pentamidine, foscarnetCyclosporine
Amino glycosides, amphotericin B
Cetuximab
1155. Dose of benzathaine penicillin G to be
      given in patients of latent syphilis in
      patients without penicillin allergy and
      normal CSF findings is
 a) 0.6mU IM / week for 3 weeks

 b) 1.2mU IM / week for 3 weeks

 c) 2.4mU IM / week for 3 weeks

 d) 4.8mU IM / week for 3 weeks



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. 2.4mU IM / week for 3 weeks
Primary, secondary, or early latent- CSF normal or not examined:
Penicillin G benzathine (single dose of 2.4 mU IM)
CSF abnormal -Treat as neurosyphilis
Late latent (or latent of uncertain duration), cardiovascular, or benign
tertairy- CSF normal or not examined: Penicillin G benzathine (2.4
mU IM weekly for 3 weeks).
CSF abnormal : Treat as neurosyphilis
1156. SARS infection case fatality rate of
      >50% is observed in patients of which
      age group?
 a) < 20 yrs

 b) 20 - 40 years

 c) 40 - 60 years

 d) > 65 years



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. > 65 years
The case fatality rate from SARS-CoV infection during the 2003
outbreak was 10-17%. No pediatric deaths were reported. The
estimated case fatality rate according to age varied from <1% for
those younger than 20 year of age to >50% for those older than 65
yr of age.
1157. Which of the following corroborates to
      the presence of clostridium difficle
      infection in patients taking antibiotics
      for another cause?
a) Diarrhoea unformed stools per 12 h for 2 days with no other
   recognized cause

b) Diarrhoea unformed stools per 24 h for 2 days with no other
   recognized cause

c) Diarrhoea unformed stools per 24 h for 3 days with no other
   recognized cause

d) Diarrhoea unformed stools per 24 h for 4 days with no other
   recognized cause



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Diarrhoea unformed stools per 24 h for 2 days with
no other recognized cause
Diarrhoea unformed stools per 24 h for 2 days with no other
recognized cause.
Toxin A or B detected in the stool by PCR or culture.
Pseudomembranes seen in colon by endoscopy.
1158. Following are the features of
      neuropathy associated with varicella-
      zoster infection except
 a) Persistent infection in neurons of sensory ganglia

 b) With reactivation virus transported along nerves to skin

 c) Shingles are distributed along motor dermatomes

 d) Intranuclear inclusions are not found in peripheral nervous
    system



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Shingles are distributed along motor dermatomes
Varicella-zoster is one of the most common viral infections of the
peripheral nervous system.
Following chickenpox, a latent infection persists within neurons of
sensory ganglia.
If the virus is reactivated, sometimes many years later, it may be
transported along the sensory nerves to the skin.
Here it infects keratinocytes, leading to a painful, vesicular skin
eruption (shingles) in a distribution that follows sensory dermatomes
Most common is the involvement of thoracic or trigeminal nerve
dermatomes.
1159. According    to the congenital rubella syndrome eradication program, the
      first priority for rubella vaccination is offered to which of the following
           group?

 a) All female children at one year

 b) All non pregnant women

 c) All non pregnant women of age 15 to 34

 d) All adolescent non pregnant girls 15 to 24 years of age



Correct Answer - C
The first and foremost priority has been given to the group of all non-pregnant women
between the ages 15 and 34 for rubella vaccination. The other three options are suitable
age groups.
Ref: Park’s Textbook of Preventive and Social Medicine 19th edition; pages 130 - 131.
1160. Extrahepatic Manifestations of Hepatitis
      C include all of the following Except:
 a) Lichen Planus

 b) Celiac Disease

 c) Glomerulonephritis

 d) Cryoglobulinemia



Correct Answer - B
Answer is B (Celiac disease)
Extrahepatic manifestations in viral hepatitis C: Wepatology' by
Kuntz
Agranulocytosis
Aplastic anaemia
Corneal ulceration
Ciyoglobillinaemia
Diabetes mellitus (type I)
Erythema exsudativum multiforme
Glomerulonephritis
Guillain-Barre syndrome
Hyperlipasaemia
Lichen planus
Non-Hodgkin lymphoma
Polyarteritis nodosa
Polyarthritis
Polyneuritis
Porphyria cutanea tarda
Sialadenitis
Sjogren's syndrome /Sicca syndrome
Thrombocytopenia
Thyroiditis
1161. All are features of SIRS except-
a) RR> 24 & Paco2 <22mm hg

b) WBC >11 or <4

c) Temperature <36 and >38

d) PR >90



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. RR> 24 & Paco2 <22mm hg
1162. Which of the following is not true about
      the epididymo¬orchitis of mumps?
 a) It is the most common manifestation of mumps infection

 b) Testicular enlargement usually resolves in 1 week

 c) Bilateral testicular involvement seen in 10 - 30% of cases

 d) Sterility rarely develops in these patients



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. It is the most common manifestation of mumps
infection
Epididymo-orchitis is the second most common manifestation of
mumps, developing in 15–30% of cases in postpubertal males.
– Orchitis, characterized by a painful, tender, fever and enlarged
testis, is bilateral in 10–30% of cases and resolves within 1 week.
– Oophoritis (manifested by lower abdominal pain and vomiting)
occurs in ~5% of women with mumps.
– Sterility in mumps is rare.
1163. Most common nerve affected in
      leprosy
 a) Posterior tibial

 b) Ulnar

 c) Median

 d) Facial



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Posterior tibial
Leprosy affects peripheral mixed nerves and cutaneous nerves.
The most common peripheral nerves affected in the order of
frequency are the posterior tibial>ulnar> median> lateral popliteal>
facial > radial
1164. Dengue shock syndrome is
      characterized by the following except -
 a) Hepatomegaly

 b) Pleural effusion

 c) Thrombocytopenia

 d) Decreased haemoglobin



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Decreased hemoglobin
Dengue hemorrhagic fever
Fever                       Minor or Major hemorrhgic
manifestations
Hepatomegaly                 Thrombocytopenia 100,000/mm3
Hypoalbuminemia              Objective evidence of increased
capillary permeability (hematocrit 20%.)
Pleural effusion (by chest radiograph) [Nelson, 17/e, p 1093]
Criteria for Dengue shock syndrome
It includes those for dengue hemorrhagic fever plus, Hypotension or
narrow pulse.
1165. The following statements are true
      regarding botulism except -
 a) Infant botulism is caused by ingestion of preformed toxin

 b) Clostridium botulinum A, B, C and F cause human disease

 c) The gene for botulinum toxin is encoded by a bacteriophage

 d) Clostridium baratti may cause botulism



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Infant botulism is caused by ingestion of
preformed toxin
Infant botulism is caused by ingestion of spores. Spores are
ingested in food, get established in the gut and there produce the
toxin.
"Seven main types of C. botulinum, designated A - G, produce
antigenically distinct toxins with pharmacologically identical action.
All types can cause human disease, but type A, B and E are most
common".
(In Harrison & Ananthanarayan, eight types of C. botulinum A, B, CI,
C2, D, E, F, G have been mentioned).
Toxin production in clostridium botulinum appears to be determined
by presence of bacteriophage (at least in type C & D).
"Clostridium butyricum and clostridium baratti have also been found
to produce toxin". - Harrison 16th/e 843 - Any strain producing toxin
will obviously cause botulism.
1166. Austrian syndrome is caused by which
      infection
 a) Staphylococcus aureus

 b) Streptococcus pneumoniae

 c) Staphylococcus epidermidis

 d) Streptococcus viridans



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Streptococcus pneumoniae
Austrian syndrome is a medical condition first described by Robert
Austrian in 1957.
The classical triad consists of pneumonia, endocarditis, and
meningitis, all caused by Streptococcus pneumoniae.
It is associated with alcoholism, due to the presence of hyposplenia
(reduced splenic functioning), and can be seen in males between 40
and 60 years old.
1167. Factors contributing to the
      development of complications in
      measles are the following except-
 a) Age group 5-20 years

 b) Higher case fatality with overcrowding

 c) Severe malnutrition

 d) Lower serum retinol levels



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Age group 5-20 years
Complications of measles are largely attributable to the pathogenic
effects of the virus on the respiratory tract and immune system.
Morbidity and mortality from measles are greatest in patients
younger than 5 yr of age (especially <1 yr of age) and older than 20
yr of age.
1168. True about VHL syndrome is
 a) It is an autosomal recessive condition

 b) Central nervous system is not involved

 c) Regular screening for clear cell carcinoma of kidneys is
    essential

 d) VHL is a growth promoter gene



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Regular screening for clear cell carcinoma of
kidneys is essential
Von Hippel-Lindau disease (VHL) is a rare autosomal dominant
disease characterized by abnormal angiogenesis with benign and
malignant tumors that affect multiple tissues.
The disease is inherited as a mutation in one allele of the VHL
tumor-suppressor gene.
Somatic mutation of the normal allele leads to retinal angiomas,
central nervous system (CNS) hemangioblastomas,
pheochromocytomas and multicentric clear cell cysts,
hemangiomas, and adenomas of the kidney.
The hi h risk of renal cell carcinoma mandates i eriodic surveillance
usuall earl in adults b CT or MRI. Routine screening and awareness
of the natural history of lesions has enabled renal-sparing
approaches to disease management.
1169. Tuberous sclerosis is caused by
      mutations in the following proteins
 a) Hamartin

 b) Tuberin

 c) Merlin

 d) Ankyrin



Correct Answer - A:B
Answer- A. Hamartin & B. Tuberin
It is caused by mutations in either the TSC1 gene, which maps to
chromosome 9q34, and encodes a protein termed hamartin, or
mutations in the TSC2 gene, which maps to chromosome 16p13.3
and encodes the tuberin protein.
Hamartin forms a complex with tuberin, which inhibits cellular
signaling through the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR), and
acts as a negative regulator of the cell cycle.
Patients with tuberous sclerosis have seizures, mental retardation,
adenoma sebaceum (facial angiofibromas), shagreen patch,
hypomelanotic macules, periungual fibromas, renal
angiomyolipomas, and cardiac rhabdomyomas.
1170. What characteristic finding of tuberous
      sclerosis is present at birth but not later
      in life?
 a) Cardiac rhabdomyosarcoma

 b) Facial angiofibroma

 c) Periungal fibroma

 d) Renal angiomyolipoma



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Cardiac rhabdomyosarcoma
Patients with tuberous sclerosis have seizures, mental retardation,
adenoma sebaceum (facial angiofibromas), shagreen patch,
hypomelanotic macules, periungual fibromas, renal
angiomyolipomas, and cardiac rhabdomyomas.
Cardiac rhabdomyosarcomas can be present at birth in upto 80% of
the infants with tuberous sclerosis. These involute in the first three
years of life and completely disappear by adulthood
1171. Following is not true about epinephrine
 a) Has potent alpha and beta stimulating properties

 b) It improves coronary perfusion pressure and myocardial blood
    flow

 c) Increases cerebral blood flow during CPR

 d) Routine use of high dose epinephrine during resuscitation is
    indicated



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Routine use of high dose epinephrine during
resuscitation is indicated
Epinephrine (adrenaline) is an endogenous catecholamine with
potent a- and 11-adrenergic stimulating properties.
The adrenergic action (vasoconstriction) increases systemic and
pulmonary vascular resistance. The resultant higher aortic diastolic
blood pressure improves coronary perfusion pressure and
myocardial blood flow even though it reduces global cardiac output
during CPR.
epinephrine also increases cerebral blood flow durin ood u uali
CPR because peripheral vasoconstriction directs a greater
proportion of flow to the cerebral circulation.However, epinephrine
can decrease local cerebral microcirculatory blood flow at a time
when global cerebral flow is increased.
1172. Z track technique must be used for
      administration of
 a) Injection Iron Dextran deep IM

 b) Injection Hydroxyzine hydrochloride deep IM

 c) Injection Depomedroxyprogesterone iv

 d) Injection erythromycin



Correct Answer - A:B
Answer- A. Injection Iron Dextran deep IM & B. Injection
Hydroxyzine hydrochloride deep IM
With intramuscular injections medications can leak upward into the
subcutaneous tissues causing staining, bruising and significant pain
for several weeks or longer with some medications.
Nurses are encouraged to use the Z track technique (causing a
needle track or pathway in the shape of Z) any time an intramuscular
injection is given, to prevent leakage and associated pain.
The Z track technique must be used whenever a deep intramuscular
injection of iron dextran, and other irritating solutions such as
hydroxyzine hydrochloride and several antipsychotic agents are
given.
1173. In man what quantity of ethyl alcohol
      consumed daily for > 10 years
      increases the relative risk of
      development of alcoholic liver disease
 a) 20g/d

 b) 40g/d

 c) 60g/d

 d) 80g/d



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. 80g/d
80g/day x 10+ yr.
1174. Not a feature of Wernicke's Korsakoff
      Syndrome
 a) Ataxia

 b) Psychosis

 c) Normal pupillary response

 d) Opthalmoplegia



Correct Answer - C
C i.e. Normal pupillary response
1175. Which of the following antineoplastic
      agents is used in the management of
      Hodgkins lymphoma, non Hodgkins
      lymphoma and small cell carcinoma of
      lung?
 a) Cisplatin

 b) Bleomycin

 c) Paclitaxel

 d) Doxorubicin



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Cisplatin
Cisplatin is used in the management of Hodgkins lymphoma, non
Hodgkins lymphoma and small cell carcinoma of lung.
1176. Pierre robin syndrome following is true
      except
 a) Consists of micrognathia and cleft palate

 b) Tongue is of normal size

 c) Airway obstruction particularly during expiration

 d) 30 - 50% patients have Stickler syndrome



Correct Answer - C
Answer C. Airway obstruction particularly during expiration
Pierre Robin syndrome consists of micrognathia usually
accompanied by a high arched or cleft palate.
The tongue is usually of normal size, but the floor of the mouth is
foreshortened.
The air passages can become obstructed, particularly on inspiration,
usually requiring treatment to prevent suffocation.
The infant should be maintained in a prone or partially prone position
so that the tongue falls forward to relieve respiratory obstruction.
Some patients require tra- cheostomy.
Mandibular distraction procedures in the neonate can improve
mandibular size, enhance respiration, and facilitate oral feedings.
Sufficient spontaneous mandibular growth can take place within a
few months to relieve the potential airway obstruction.
Often the growth of the mandible achieves a normal profile in 4-6
year.
1177. Mantle field radiation was used for
      management of -
 a) Hodgkins lymphoma

 b) Mantle cell lymphoma

 c) Multiple myeloma

 d) Cervical carcinoma



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Hodgkins lymphoma
Mantle field radiation is a type of radiation treatment used for
Hodgkin's lymphoma
The term 'mantle' is derived from the name of a garment, much like
a cloak, used many years back. The shape of the exposed area the
radiation field has contours that resemble the shielding cloak.
This type of large radiation field is not commonly used today.
1178. Alien limb syndrome seen in
 a) Post neurosurgical cases

 b) Alzheimers disease

 c) Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease

 d) All the above



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. All the above
Alien hand syndrome (AHS) is a condition in which a person
experiences their limbs acting seemingly on their own, without
control over the actions.
The term is used for a variety of clinical conditions and most
commonly affects the left hand.
Alien hand syndrome is best documented in cases where a person
has had the two hemispheres of their brain surgically separated, a
procedure sometimes used to relieve the symptoms of extreme
cases of epilepsy.
It also occurs in some cases after brain surgery,stroke,infection,
tumor, aneurysm and specific degenerative brain conditions such as
Alzheimer's disease and Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease.
1179. Osmolarity of Milk F-100 is
 a) 399 mOsm/L

 b) 409 mOsm/L

 c) 419 mOsm/L

 d) 429 mOsm/L



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. 419 mOsm/L
UNICEF and WHO prepared two formula diets by modification of the
cows milk - Milk F-75 (starter 75 kcal/100 ml) and F-100 (followup
100 kcal/ 100 ml).
1180. Which of the following drugs can cause
      seizures except?
a) Lithium

b) Phencyclindine

c) INH

d) Ketorolac



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Ketorolac
Psychotropics
Antidepressants
Antipsychotics
Lithium
Drugs of abuse Amphetamine Cocaine
Phencyclidine Methylphenidate Flumazenil
1181. Riboflavin deficiency causes
 a) Corneal vascularization

 b) Anemia

 c) Personality changes

 d) All the above



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. All the above
Riboflavin deficiency is manifested principally by lesions of the
mucocutaneous surfaces of the mouth and skin. In addition to the
mucocutaneous lesions, corneal vascularization, anemia, and
personality changes have been described with riboflavin deficiency.
1182. Soret band in which porphyrins absorb
      light lie at what wavelength of the
      spectrum of light?
 a) 200nm

 b) 300nm

 c) 400nm

 d) 500nm



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. 400nm
Due to this structure porphyrins avidly absorb light in a region near
400 nm of the light spectrum. This part of the light spectrum is called
the Soret band.
1183. Which of the following is not seen after
      nerve transection?
 a) Morphologic pattern of wallerian degeneration

 b) Myelin ovoids

 c) Painful neuroma

 d) Neuroma in continuity



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Neuroma in continuity
The morphologic hallmarks of axonal neuropathies produced by
cutting a peripheral nerve, results in a prototypical pattern of injury
described as Wallerian degeneration
Within a day of injury, the distal axons begin to fragment and the
associated myelin sheaths unravel and disintegrate into spherical
structures (myelin ovoids).
A failure of the outgrowing axons to find their distal target can
produce a "pseudotumor" termed traumatic neuroma— a
nonneoplastic haphazard whorled proliferation of axonal processes
and associated Schwann cells that results in a painful nodule.
1184. Reactive nitrogen species for killing of
      microbes are mainly derived from
 a) Elemental nitrogen [N3]

 b) Nitric Oxide [NO]

 c) Nitrogen Dioxide [NO2]

 d) Nitrous Oxide [N20]



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Nitric Oxide [NO]
Killing of microbes is accomplished by reactive oxygen species
(ROS, also called reactive oxygen intermediates) and reactive
nitrogen species, mainly derived from nitric oxide (NO), and these as
well as lysosomal enzymes destroy phagocytosed debris.
This is the final step in the elimination of infectious agents and
necrotic cells.
1185. During state of arousal in men
      relaxation of smooth muscle in corpus
      cavernosum is mainly caused by
 a) Acethycholine

 b) Nitric oxide

 c) Bicarbonate ions

 d) Calcium



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Nitric oxide
Erectile dysfunction (ED) refers to the inability of men to attain and
maintain an erect penis with sufficient rigidity to allow sexual
intercourse.
Nitric oxide (NO) released parasympathetic nonadrenergic
noncholinergic (NANC) nerves andvascular endothelium is the major
transmitter causing relaxation of smooth muscle in corpus
cavernosum and blood vessels supplying it; ACh and PGs also play
a role.
1186. Which of the following genes if affected
      will sporadically cause Juvenile
      myeloid leukemia?
 a) NF1

 b) PTEN

 c) APC

 d) SMAD2



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. NF1
NF1 - Neurobiastoma, juvenile myeloid leukemia
1187. Chronic manifestations of Aspergillosis
      are not evident in which of the following
      organs?
 a) Skin

 b) Brain

 c) Lung

 d) Eye



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Eye
Lung, sinus, brain, skin, heart,
1188. All of the following are true about incontinentia pigmenti, except:
 a) Ocular involvement is seen in almost 100% cases and is
    typically unilateral

 b) Avascularity of peripheral retina

 c) Primary skin abnormality

 d) X-linked dominant



Correct Answer - A
Ocular involvement is seen in about 20-35 percent of the cases of incontinentia pigmenti
but not in 100 percent cases as mentioned in the option. Incontinentia pigmenti is a X-linked
dominant primary skin disease that leads to avascularity of the retina.
Ref: Rook's Textbook of Dermatology 7th Edition, Pages 39.20-3.22; The Retinal Atlas By
Lawrence A. Yannuzzi, Page 38
1189. Oculogyric crisis is known to be
      produced by all of the following drugs
      except
 a) Trifluoperazine

 b) Atropine

 c) Perchlorperazine

 d) Perphenazine



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Atropine
Oculogyric crisis is one of the manifestations seen in acute dystonic
reaction (acute muscular dystonia).
Other manifestations are facial grimacing, torticollis, locked jaw,
abnormal contraction of spinal muscles (opisthotonus).
It occurs within 1 to 5 days of antipsychotic therapy.
Trifluperazine, perchlorperazine and perphenazine are antipsychotic
1190. Which of the following primarily
      governs the uptake of Tc-99m MDP in
      body?
 a) Amount of osteogenic activity

 b) Amount of iodine uptake

 c) Amount of calcium uptake

 d) Amount of catecholamine activity



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Amount of osteogenic activity
Technetium 99-m is a commonly used radiopharmaceutical.
Technetium 99-m methylene diphosphonate (Tc-99mMDP),
desirable for the gamma carmera imaging is the commonly used
form.
Tc-99mMDP can be prepared from a kit containing, sodium
pertechnitate (NaTcO4) vial, MDP, stabilizers and stannous ion.
1191. Technitium-99m pertechnetate labelled
      methylene diphosphonate is
      structurally similar to
 a) Calcium phosphate

 b) Phosphorus

 c) Sodium bicarbonate

 d) Magnesiumsulfate



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Calcium phosphate
The radionucletide administered is Technitium- 99m pertechnetate
labeled methylene diphosphonate is an analog of calcium
phosphate.
1192. Laproscopic procedure patient
      develops shoulder pain due to
 a) Subphrenic abscess

 b) Positional pain during surgery

 c) Subdiaphragmatic migration of gas

 d) Injury to liver



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Subdiaphragmatic migration of gas
One type of pain that is unique to laparoscopy is the post
laparoscopy shoulder pain due to the phrenic nerve irritation to the
diaphragm caused by the CO, gas that remains in the abdomen at
the end of the procedure. When the patient sits up, the gas moves
upwards to the diaphragm and irritates it leading to referred pain C3-
C%.
1193. A patient comes with a complaint of
      shoulder pain after laparoscopic
      surgery. What should be the next step
      in management?
 a) Oral paracetamol for 2 - 3 days

 b) USG of shoulder region

 c) Diagnostic shoulder arthroscopy

 d) Intraarticular lignocaine injection



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Oral paracetamol for 2 - 3 days
Shoulder tip pain
The patient should be warned about this preoperatively and told that
the pain is referred from the diaphragm and not due to a local
problem in the shoulders.
It can be at its worst 24 hours after the operation. It usually settles
within 2-3 days and is relieved by simple analgesics, such as
paracetamol.
1194. Which of the following should be done
      for an acute onset painful scrotal
      swelling in 12 years old male?
 a) Doppler stethoscope evaluation

 b) Administer analgesics

 c) Advise bed rest

 d) Administer antibiotics



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Doppler stethoscope evaluation
Acute onset painful scrotal swelling in 12 years old preadolescent
male is most probably due to torsion of testis. In suspected cases of
torsion of testis or testicular appendage a doppler stethoscope
should be used to evaluate blood flow to the testicles.
1195. Earliest hematological change following
      spleenectomy is
 a) Leukocytosis and thrombocytosis

 b) Presence of Heinz bodies

 c) Evidence of Howell Jolly bodies

 d) Poikilocytosis



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Leukocytosis and thrombocytosis
In the immediate postsplenectomy period, leukocytosis (up to
25,000/4) and thrombocytosis (up to 1.106/4) develop, but within 2-3
weeks, blood cell counts and survival of each cell lineage are usually
normal.
1196.
Following road traffic accident patient suffers
polytrauma and is evaluated in the
emergency section of the hospital. His pulse
rate is 116, respiratory rate is 24, blood
pressure of 122/78 mm of Hg and patient is
mildly anxious. What is the approximate
blood loss patient has following trauma?
a) <750 ml

b) 750 - 1500 ml

c) 1500 - 2000 ml

d) >2000 ml



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. 750 - 1500 ml
1197. Sebaceous cyst occurs occur in all the
      following locations in body except
 a) Palms and soles

 b) Axilla

 c) Back

 d) Pubic area



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Palms and soles
The scalp, scrotum, shoulders, neck, and back are the common
sites, but they can occur wherever there are sebaceous glands.
There are no sebaceous glands on the palms of the hands and soles
of the feet, thus sebaceous cysts are not found in these locations.
1198. Cortisol levels remain elevated for how
      many week/s following hemorrhage?
 a) 1

 b) 2

 c) 3

 d) 4



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. 1
Burn patients have demonstrated elevated circulating cortisol levels
for upto 4 weeks, while soft tissue injury and hemorrhage may
sustain elevated cortisol levels for as long as 1 week.
1199. Surgical treatment of congenital
      hydrocele recommended if it fails to
      resolve by what age?
 a) 1 year

 b) 2 years

 c) 3 years

 d) 4 years



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. 2 years
A patent processusvaginalis that is too narrow to prevent the
development of an inguinal hernia may nevertheless allow peritoneal
fluid to track down around the testis to form a congenital hydrocele.
The majority resolve spontaneously as the processus continues to
obliterate but surgical ligation is recommended in boys older than 2
years if they do not resolve spontaneously.
1200. What percentage of gall stones are
      radio opaque?
 a) 10- 20

 b) 30 - 40

 c) 50 - 60

 d) 70 - 80



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. 10- 20
Cholelithiasis is a common cause of epigastric or right upper
quadrant pain in middle aged obese female patients.
Only 15 - 20% of the gall stones are radio-opaque.
Gallstones are the most common biliary pathology.
It is estimated that gallstones are present in 10-15% of the adult
population in the USA.
1201. Percentage of renal stones that are
      radio-opaque
 a) 20

 b) 40

 c) 60

 d) 80



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. 80
Routine use of noncontast CT Scan has completely revolutionized to
imaging evaluation of renal stone disease, nearly completely
replacing plain radigrpahs and X urography for diagnosis of acute
ureteral obstruction by renal stones.
Nephrolithiasis refers to the presence of calculi in the renal collecting
system.
Nearly 10 % of the population will form a renal stone in their lifetime.
Sufficient calcium oxalate and phosphate is present in 80 % of the
renal calculi for them to be radio-opaque on the plain radiographs.
1202. Indications of thoracotomy in blunt
      chest trauma include all except
 a) Initial drainage of > 500 ml of fresh blood

 b) Rupture of bronchous

 c) Continued bleeding of > 200 ml/ hr for >/= 3hrs

 d) Unsuccesful attempt at drainage of cardiac tamponade



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Initial drainage of > 500 ml of fresh blood
Continued bleeding of > 200 ml/hr for > 3 hrs
Rupture of bronchus, aorta, esophagus or diaphragm.
Cardiac tamponade (if needle aspiration unsuccessful).
1203. Visual examination is used as
      screening test for
 a) Melanoma

 b) Breast cancer

 c) Thyroid cancer

 d) Testicular cancer



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Melanoma
Visual examination is the only screening test for melanoma or skin
cancer.
For lesions with suspicion of head and neck melanoma,
dermatologists visual examination screening is 89 -97% sensitive
with 35 - 75% positive predictive value.
1204. Embolisation of tumors is done using
a) Polyvinyl alcohol

b) Autologous blood clots

c) Absolute ethanol

d) All the above



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. All the above
The following are the embolic materials commonly used for
trans-arterial embolization:
Gelatin sponge particles
Microspheres
Autologous blood clots
Polyvinyl alcohol
n- butylcyanoacrylate glue
Absolute ethanol
1205.
  Definitive surgery is a part of which stage of
  damage control surgery?
    a) I

    b) II

    c) III

    d) IV



   Correct Answer - D
   Answer- D. IV
   Following major injury, protracted surgery in the physiologically
   unstable patient with the 'deadly triad' - the combination of
   hypothermia, acidosis and coagulopathy
   'Damage control' or 'damage limitation surgery' is a concept that
   originated from naval architecture, whereby a ship was designed to
   have areas sealed off in the case of damage, to limit flooding.
   Stages-
1. Patient selection
2. Control of haemorrhage and control of contamination
3. Resuscitation continued in the intensive care unit
4. Definitive surgery
5. Abdominal closure
1206. Breast surgery is considered under
      what category of cardiac risk?
 a) > 10 %

 b) 5 - 10 %

 c) 1 - 5 %

 d) <1%



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. <1%
Low (reported cardia risk < 1%)-
Endoscopic procedures
Superficial proccdure
Cataract surgery
Breast surgery
Ambulatory surgery
1207. What is the order of disorientation,
      which a person goes through after an
      event of trauma to head?
 a) First time, then place followed by person

 b) First place, then time followed by person

 c) First person, then time followed by place

 d) First time, then person followed by place



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. First time, then place followed by person
Orientation refers to the cleints recognition of person, place and time
- that is knowing who and where e or she is and the correct day,
date and year. This is commonly documented as "oriented X 3".
Absence of correct information about person, place and time is
referred to as disortientation.
1208. Which of the following is the preferred
      route of access for total parenteral
      nutrition in a patient who requires the
      same for <14 days and there is
      otherwise no indication for use of
      central catheter?
 a) Internal jugular vein

 b) External jugular vein

 c) Periphaeral vein

 d) PICC line



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Periphaeral vein
Administration of parenteral nutrition via a peripheral venous
catheter should be considered for patients who are likely to need
short-term parenteral nutrition (less than 14 days) who have no need
for central access for other reasons. Care should be taken in
catheter choice, and in attention to pH, tonicity and long-term
compatibility of the parenteral nutrition formulations in order to avoid
administration or stability problems.
1209. Which of the following is not true about
      use of graft in vascular surgery
 a) Autologus saphenous vein achieves superior patency rates to
    prosthetic materials especially in femorodistal bypass

 b) The patency of the PTFE grafts may be improved by
    interposition of a vein cuff at proximal anastomosis

 c) Doppler ultrasound assessment is the method of choice for
    quality assuarance on completion of operative procedure

 d) In the absence of specific contraindications aspirin should be
    prescribed for all the patients of peripheral vascular disease



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. The patency of the PTFE grafts may be improved by
interposition of a vein cuff at proximal anastomosis
Autologous saphenous vein achieves superior patency rates to
prosthetic materials, especially in femorodistal bypass.
In situ and reversed vein graft bypasses perform equally well and
the choice of technique should be based upon anatomical
considerations that are specific to individual patients.
In the absence of saphenous vein, no convencing studies exist to
suggest the preferred prosthetic alternative.
The patency of PTFE grafts may be improved by interposition of a
vein cuff at the distal anastomosis.
Patency rates associated with pre-cuffed PTFE, grafts are
comparable to that obtained from standard PTFE grafts with an
interposition vein cuff.
There is no justification for the routine use of adjuvant distal
arterivenous fistulae.
1210. Intracranial pressure is not raised
      during
 a) Hyperventilation

 b) Status epilepticus

 c) Head injury

 d) Subdural hematoma



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Hyperventilation
Hyperventilation is used as a treatment with raised intracranial
pressure.
Hyperventilation causes decreased PaCO2 which subsequently
leads to arterial vasoconstriction thus lowering cerebral blood flow
(CBF), cerebral blood volume, and intracranial pressure
1211. Immediate physiological response to
      sudden decrease in blood volume is
 a) Release of epinephrine

 b) Shift of fluid from intracellular to interstitial compartment

 c) Release of angiotensin

 d) Release of thyroxine



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Release of epinephrine
The major hemodynamic abnormality in hypovolemic shock is
decrease in preload.
The immediate physiological response of the body to the sudden
decrease in volume (preload), is a release of catecholamines
(epinephrine, norepinephrine).
The subsequent increase in heart rate and contractility help maintain
cardiac output.
1212. All of the following are indications for
      bariatric surgery except -
 a) BMI>40 kg/m2

 b) BMI> 35 kg/m2 with atleast one comorbidity

 c) BMI>30 with long standing diabetes

 d) Failure of other methods of weight loss



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. BMI>30 with long standing diabetes
Indications for bariatric swgery
BMI > 40kg/m2
BMI > 35 kg/m2 with atleast one comorbidity
Patient at high risk of obesity associated morbidity and mortality
Failure of other methods of wight loss
1213. Slip sign is seen in
 a) Lipoma

 b) Desmoid tumor

 c) Sebaceous cyst

 d) Hernia



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Lipoma
A characteristic "slippage sign" may be elicited by gently sliding the
fingers off the edge of the tumor. The tumor will be felt to slip out
from under, as opposed to a sebaceous cyst or an abscess that is
tethered by surrounding induration.
1214. For reimplantation digits are stored in
 a) Ice packs

 b) Deep freeze

 c) Cold saline

 d) Plastic bags with ice



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Plastic bags with ice
The amputated part should be wrapped in moistened gauze and
placed in a sealed plastic bag. This bag should then be placed in an
ice water bath. Do not use dry ice and do not allow the part to
contact ice directly; frostbite can occur in the amputated part, which
will decrease its chance of survival after replantation. Bleeding
should be controlled in the proximal stump by as minimal a means
as necessary, and the stump dressed with a nonadherent gauze and
bulky dressing."
1215. Characteristic site for development of
      venous leg ulcers is
 a) Skin of gaiter region

 b) Behind lateral malleolus

 c) Shin of tibia

 d) Medial aspect of knee



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Skin of gaiter region
The venous ulcer of the leg characteristically develops in the skin of
the gaiter region, the area between the muscles of the calf and the
ankle. This is the region where many of the Cockett perforators join
the posterior tibial vein to the surface vein, known as the posterior
arch vein
The majority of ulcers develop on the medial side of the calf but
ulcers associated with lesser saphenous incompetence often
develop on the lateral side of the leg.
Ulcers can develop on any part of the calf skin in patients with post-
thrombotic legs; however, venous ulcers rarely extend on to the foot
or into the upper calf and, if there is ulceration at these sites, other
diagnoses should be seriously considered.
1216. Which of the following is true about the
      management of venous ulcer of lower
      limb?
 a) Initial treatment is debridement and surgery

 b) Compression dressings should ideally be applied on twice
    weekly basis

 c) Antibiotics do not speed up the ulcer healing

 d) Biological dressings do not have potential to improve healing



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Antibiotics do not speed up the ulcer healing
Patients are initially treated by a compression bandaging regimen.
Alternative to these bandaging regimens is to apply a bland
absorbent leak-proof dressing beneath a graduated elastic
compression stocking (class II).
Biopsies are indicated if malignancy is suspected and it is important
to remember that a Marjolin's type of ulcer (a squamous cell or basal
cell carcinoma) can develop in a chronic longstanding venous ulcer.
Consideration must be given to healing the ulcer by excision and
grafting.
Biological dressings have been developed, including fetal
keratinocytes and collagen meshes
Pinch grafts and ulcer excision with mesh grafting have been shown
to provide good early healing with moderate long-term results
1217. Which of the following suture has max
      tensile strength and minimum tissue
      reaction
 a) Poliglecaprone

 b) Polypropylene

 c) Polygalctine

 d) Polydioxanone



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Polypropylene
Polypropylene sutures are non-absorbable and provide permanent
wound support.
Polypropylene sutures are blue colored for easy identification during
surgery.
Polypropylene sutures have excellent tensile strength and are used
for orthopaedic, plastic and micro surgeries, general closure and
cardiovascular surgeries
1218. Blunt trauma exploratory laparotomy
      done nonexpansile swelling found on
      mesenteric border of intestine,
      management
 a) Resection and anastomosis

 b) Ligation

 c) Excision of swelling

 d) None



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. None
Non Expansile swelling on mesenteric border of intestine is almost
always due to mesenteric adenitis and it is an incidental finding,
hence warranting no surgical intervention.
1219. In SVC syndrome for non small cell
      carcinoma of lung management done
 a) Radiotherapy

 b) Immunotherapy

 c) Chemotherapy

 d) Surgery



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Radiotherapy
In patients with SVCS secondary to non–small-cell carcinoma of the
lung, radiotherapy is the primary treatment. The likelihood of patients
benefiting from such therapy is high, but the overall prognosis of
these patients is poor
Small cell carcinoma of lung presenting as SVC syndrome -
Combination of chemotherapy and radiotherapy.
Non Small cell carcinoma of lung presenting as SVC syndrome-
Radiotherpy alone.
1220. Hadfields operation is performed for
      which of the following pathology?
 a) Duct ectasia

 b) Fibroadenoma

 c) Mondors disease

 d) Inflammatory breast carcinoma



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Duct ectasia
TREATMENT-
Stop smoking
Hadfield’s operation- excision of all major ducts
Antibiotics- amoxiclav and metronidazole
1221. Microdochotomy is treatment for
 a) Duct ectasia

 b) Breast abscess

 c) Duct papilloma

 d) DCIS



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Duct papilloma
The final diagnosis is made by excising the involved duct
(Microdochotomy) and any underlying mass if present and
subjecting them for a histopathological diagnosis
1222. Previous radition therapy for which
      disease particulary increases the risk of
      breast carcinoma development?
 a) Hodgkins lymphoma

 b) Mantle cell lymphoma

 c) Nasopharyngeal carcinoma

 d) Lung carcinoma



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Hodgkins lymphoma
A real problem in women who have been treated with mantle
radiotherapy as part of the management of Hodgkin's disease, in
which significant doses of radiation to the breast are received.
1223. Which of the following histological type
      of breast carcinoma worst prognosis?
 a) Tubular

 b) Colloid

 c) Papillary

 d) Scirrhous



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Scirrhous
MC type of breast carcinoma is invasive ductal carcinoma
(schirrhous).
MC form seen (60- 75%)
Hard lump, whitish yellow, non capsulated, irregular with
cartilaginous consistency
Retraction of nipple
1224. 52 years female patient presents with 4
      cm diameter diagnosed breast cancer
      lesion with ipsilateral axillary and
      contralateral supraclavicular
      lymphadenopathy. As per AJCC
      system, patient belongs to which stage
      of breast cancer?
 a) Ilia

 b) None

 c) IIIc

 d) IV



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. IV
1225. Best prognosis for carcinoma breast is
      seen with which of the following?
 a) <1cm size, nodes -ye , ER/ PR +ve, her 2/ neu -ye

 b) <1cm size, nodes -ye , ER/ PR -ye, her 2/ neu +ve

 c) <2cm size, nodes -ye , ER/ PR +ve, her 2/ neu -ye

 d) <2cm size, nodes -ye , ER/ PR -ye, her 2/ neu +ve



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. <1cm size, nodes -ye , ER/ PR +ve, her 2/ neu -ye
Molecular changes in the tumor are also useful. Tumors that
overexpress erbB2 (HER2/neu) or have a mutated p53 gene have a
worse prognosis. Tumors that overexpress erbB2 are more likely to
respond to higher doses of doxorubicin- containing regimens and
predict those tumors that will respond to HER2/neu antibodies
(trastuzumab) (herceptin) and HER2/ neu kinase inhibitors.
1226. Favorable prognosis with > 90% 5 year
      survival rate for carcinoma breast is
      seen in which of the following?
 a) Screen detected ductal carcinoma in situ

 b) Screen detected lobular carcinoma in situ

 c) Node negative tumor with favourable histology

 d) None of the above



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Screen detected ductal carcinoma in situ
Intraductal carcinoma (malignant mammary ductal epithelial cells)
without any invasion into basement membrane.
1227. A female undergone surgery for left
      breast cancer 3 yrs back now
      developed blue nodule on same side
 a) Lymphangiosarcoma

 b) Recurrence

 c) Hemangioma

 d) Cellulitis



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Lymphangiosarcoma
Angiosarcoma is a vascular tumor which may arise de novo in the
breast or as a complication of the radiation therapy.
1228. What percentage of reduction in dying
      from breast cancer can be achieved
      with annual screening after age of 50
      yrs with mammography?
 a) 15- 20 %

 b) 20- 25 %

 c) 25- 30 %

 d) 30- 35 %



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. 25- 30 %
Meta-analysis examining outcomes from every randomized trial of
mammography conclusively shows a 25-30% reduction in the
chance of dying from breast cancer with annual screening after age
50 years.
1229. Which of the following hormonal levels
      influence the development of benign
      breast disease?
 a) Estrogen

 b) Progesterone

 c) Lutenizing hormone

 d) Testosterone



Correct Answer - A:B
Answer- A.Estrogen & B. Progesterone
Etiology/Pathogenesis
Hormonal: Responsiveness of breast tissue to monthly changes of
estrogen and progesterone play an important role in pathogenesis of
benign breast disease. They may be related to excess hormonal
stimulation or hypersensitivity of breast tissue.
1230. Which of the following is true about
      breast reconstruction surgery
 a) Easiest reconstruction is done using silicon gel implant

 b) TRAM flap gives better cosmetic results than LD flap

 c) Radiotherapy in post op period does not influence the outcome
    after breast reconstruction

 d) Nipple reconstruction cannot be performed under local
    anesthesia



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Easiest reconstruction is done using silicon gel
implant
The easiest type of reconstruction is using a silicone gel implant
under the pectoralis major muscle.
This may be combined with prior tissue expansion using an
expandable saline prosthesis first (or a combined device), which
creates some ptosis of the new breast.
If the skin at the mastectomy site is poor (e.g. following
radiotherapy) or if a larger volume of tissue is required, a
musculocutaneous flap can be constructed either from the
latissimusdorsi muscle (an LD flap) or using the
transversusabdominis muscle (a TRAM flap as). The latter gives an
excellent cosmetic result in experienced hands but is a lengthy
procedure and requires careful patient selection.
It is now usually performed as a free transfer using microvascular
anastomosis, although the pedicled TRAM from the contralateral
side is still used.
Variations on the TRAM flap requiring less muscle harvesting, such
as the DIEP flap (based on deep inferior epigastric vessels), are
increasingly being used.
increasingly being used.
Impediments to immediate reconstruction include insufficient theatre
time and a lack of experienced reconstructive surgeons.
In addition, if a patient is likely to need postoperative radiotherapy
then a delayed reconstruction using a flap often gives a better result.
Radiotherapy onto a prosthesis often leads to a high incidence of
capsular contracture and unacceptable results.
Nipple reconstruction is a relatively simple procedure that can be
performed under a local anaesthetic.
1231. Treatment of large omphalocele defect
      can be done by
 a) Primary closure

 b) Staged closure using PTFE mesh

 c) Painting intact sac daily with antiseptic solution

 d) All the above



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. All the above
Large defects present a more substantial problem and four
techniques have been described: non-operative therapy, skin flap
closure, staged closure and primary closure
1232. Which of the following is not true about
      Pateys mastectomy
 a) It is also called modified radical mastectomy

 b) Intercosto brachial nerves are usually preserved

 c) All lymph nodes of axilla are removed

 d) Pectoralis muscle is either divided or retracted



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Intercosto brachial nerves are usually preserved
It is also called modified radical mastectomy and is a commonly
performed procedure.
The intercostal brachial nerves are usually divided in this operation
and the patient should be warned about sensation changes
postoperatively.
The wound is drained using a wide-bore suction tube.
Early mobilisation of the arm is encouraged and physiotherapy helps
normal function to return very quickly
1233. Macroprolactinoma ideal treatment is
 a) Excision

 b) Bromocriptine

 c) Stereotactic radio surgery

 d) Observation



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B
Bromocriptine (BEC) is generally considered to be the agent of
choice in the treatment of prolactinoma because of its long track
record and safety.
1234. Initial treatment for most patient of
      growth hormone secreting pituitary
      adenoma is
 a) Transphenoidal surgical resection

 b) Somatostatin analogs

 c) GH rector antagonists

 d) Dopamine agonists



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Transphenoidal surgical resection
Transsphenoidal surgical resection by an experienced surgeon is
the preferred primary treatment for both microadenomas (cure rate
-70%) and macroadenomas (<50% cured).
   1235. Radioiodine preferred in treatment in
    a) Young patients

    b) Pregnancy

    c) Recent onset of toxic goiter

    d) Post surgery for papillary thyroid cancer



   Correct Answer - C
   Answer- C. Recent onset of toxic goiter
   The main indications for RAI therapy include the following conditions
1. Hyperthyroidism due to:
   Grave’s disease
   Toxic multinodular giotre or
   Hyperfunctioning thyroid nodules
2. Non-toxic multinodular goitre
3. Thyroid cancer.
1236. Parathyroid adenomas account for how
      much percentage of patients with
      primary hyperpara-thyroidism?
 a) 50%

 b) 60%

 c) 70%

 d) 80%



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. 80%
Solitary adenomas, A single abnormal gland, is the cause in -80% of
patients; the abnormality in the gland is usually a benign neoplasm
or adenoma and rarely a parathyroid carcinoma.
   1237. MC site for thyroglossal cyst is:
    a) Beneath the foramen caecum

    b) Floor of mouth

    c) Above hyoid

    d) Subhyoid



   Correct Answer - D
   Ans. D i.e. Subhyoid
   Sites of thyroglossal cyst
1. Subhyoid: The most common type
2. At the level of thyroid cartilage: 2nd common site
3. Suprahyoid: Double chin appearance
4. At the foramen caecum: Rare
5. At the level of cricoid cartilage: Rare
6. In the floor of the mouth
1238. Investigation of choice for hepatic
      metastasis form stomach cancer is
 a) MRI

 b) CECT

 c) USG

 d) HIDA



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. CECT
CT is the imaging modality of choice for evaluating liver metastases.
This preference is largely attributable to the effects of the dual blood
supply on the enhancement characteristics of metastases, as
compared with normal liver parenchyma.
1239. Prognosis of surgery for liver
      secondaries is best for which cancer?
 a) Colorectal

 b) Neuroendocrine

 c) Genitourinary

 d) Esophageal



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Genitourinary
For noncolorectal, nonneuroendocrine tumors, metastases from
genitourinary primaries have the best prognosis following hepatic
metastatectomy.
  1240. Indicatons of liver transplant in PCM
        poisoning are all except
    a) SGPT increase

    b) PT/INR

    c) High creatinine

    d) Encephalopathy



   Correct Answer - A
   Answer- A. SGPT increase
   Indication poor prognosis and hence necessitate a transplant in
   such patients-
1. Arterial pH < 7.3 (taken by sampling of blood from an artery)
2. All three of an international normalized ratio (INR) of greater than
   6.5, serum creatinine of greater than 300 micromoles per litre and
   the presence of encephalopathy (of grade III or IV). These three are
   markers of coagulopathy, kidney function and mental status.
  1241. Milan criteria is for
   a) Selecting patients for Liver transplantation

   b) Selecting patients for Lung transplantation

   c) Selecting patients for Kidney transplantation

   d) Selecting patients for heart trnasplantation



   Correct Answer - A
   Answer- A. Selecting patients for Liver transplantation
   The Milan criteria state that a patient is selected for
   transplantation when he or she has:
1. One lesion smaller than 5 cm
2. Up to 3 lesions smaller than 3 cm
3. No extrahepatic manifestations
4. No vascular invasion
1242. What should be the plan of
      management for a patient for whom
      while undergoing simple
      cholecystectomy T2 gall bladder
      carcinoma is discovered?
 a) Resection of 4b-5 segement, dissection of the N1-2 nodes and
    excision of port sites

 b) Post operative adjuvant chemotherapy

 c) Radical cholecystectomy

 d) Whipples procedure



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Resection of 4b-5 segement, dissection of the N1-2
nodes and excision of port sites
Stage I and II - simple cholecystectomy
Stage III – cholecystectomy + adjacent hepatic resection (atleast
2cm depth) + regional lymphadenectomy
Poor prognosis
1243. The Gall stone pain is referred to the
      shoulder through which of the following
      nerves:
 a) C2-C8

 b) T1-T4

 c) T8-T12

 d) C3-05



Correct Answer - D
Ans is 'd' i.e. C3-05
Gallstone disease may refer pain to the right shoulder tip (k/a Kehr's
sign). This is because, an inflamed gallbladder irritates the
diaphragm which is supplied by the phrenic nerve (C3-05). These
cervical nerve roots, also provide sensory supply to the right
shoulder through supraclavicular nerves. Hence the gallbladder pain
is referred to the right shoulder through the C3-05 nerve roots.
Kehr's sign is a classic example of referred pain: irritation of the
diaphragm is signaled by the phrenic nerve as pain in the area
above the collarbone. This is because the supraclavicular nerves
have the same cervical nerves origin as the phrenic nerve, C3 and
C4.
Boas' sign can also indicate stomach and duodenal disease. When
the transverse processes of thoracic vertebrae T10-T12 are pressed
or effleuraged with the bottom of the hand, pain can appear at left of
spinous processes (in stomach's lesser curvature ulcer) or at right
(in pyloric or duodenal ulcer).
Boas' or Boas's sign is hyperaesthesia (increased or altered
sensitivity) below the right scapula can be a symptom in acute
cholecystitis (inflammation of the gallbladder).
cholecystitis (inflammation of the gallbladder).
1244. 3cm stone in cystic duct near the
      ampulla of vater, The Method of
      removal is a
 a) Transduodenal approach

 b) Supraduodenal approach

 c) Lithotripsy

 d) Chemical dissolution



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Transduodenal approach
According to Maingot's "The methods of surgical drainage include
transduodenal sphincterotomy, choledochoduodenotomy, and
choledochojejunostomy."
1245. In which condition, medical treatment of
              gall stone is indicated -
 a) Stone is < 15 mm size

 b) Radio opaque stone

 c) Calcium bilirubinate stone

 d) Non functioning gall bladder



Correct Answer - A
Ans is 'a' is Stone is < 15 mm size
Medical treatments for gallstones, used alone or in combination,
include the following-
Oral bile salt therapy (ursodeoxycholic acid) (particularly for x-ray-
negative cholesterol gallstones in patients with normal gallbladder
function)
Extracorporeal shockwave lithotripsy (particularly for noncalcified
cholesterol gallstones in patients with normal gallbladder function)
Medical management is more effective in patients with good
gallbladder function who have small stones (< 1 cm) with a high
cholesterol content. Bile salt therapy may be required for more than
6 months and has a success rate of less than 50%.
1246. Regarding Ca gallbladder -
 a) Squamous cell ca is the most common

 b) Present with jaundice

 c) Good prognosis

 d) All



Correct Answer - B
Answer (b) Presents with jaundice
Biliary tract cancers tend to be slow-growing tumours that invade
locally and metastasise to local lymph nodes.
Distant metastases to the peritoneal cavity, liver and lung do occur.
Jaundice is the most common presenting feature.
Abdominal pain, early satiety and weight loss are also commonly
seen.
On examination, jaundice is evident, cachexia often noticeable and a
palpable gall bladder is present if the obstruction is in the distal
common bile duct (Courvoisier's sign).
1247. Which of the following is not a
      prognostic factor for Acute Pancreatitis
 a) Serum Amylase

 b) Serum Calcium

 c) Serum Glucose

 d) Serum AST



Correct Answer - A
Answer is A (Serum Amylase) :
Serum Amylase does not form any criteria for prognosis in Acute
Pancreatitis.
Although elevated serum amylase level is important for establishing
diagnosis of acute pancreatitis, it plays no role in predicting
prognosis or severity.
"There appears to be no definite correlation between severity of
pancreatitis and the degree of serum amylase elevation. After 48 to
72 hours, even with continuing evidence of pancreatitis, total serum
amylase levels tend to return to normal." - Harrison
Hyperglycemia (Glucose), Hypocalcemia (Calcium) and elevated
serum AST are all poor prognostic factors in accordance with
Ranson's criteria as elaborated in the previous question.
1248. Most sensitive and specific for acute
      pancreatitis amongst the following
      is:
      September 2008
 a) S.amylase

 b) S.Alanine transaminase

 c) S.lipase

 d) C-reactive protein



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C: S.lipase
Serum markers for diagnosis of acute pancreatitis:
Alanine transaminase-Associated with gallstone pancreatitis; three
fold elevation or greater in the presence of acute pancreatitis has a
positive predictive value of 95 percent in diagnosing acute gallstone
pancreatitis
Amylase
Most accurate when at least twice the upper limit of normal; amylase
levels and sensitivity decrease with time from onset of symptoms
C-reactive protein
Late marker; high levels associated with pancreatic necrosis
Lipase
Increased sensitivity in alcohol-induced pancreatitis; more specific
and sensitive than amylase for detecting acute pancreatitis
Phospholipase A2
Associated with development of pancreatic necrosis and pulmonary
failure
Procalcitonin
Early detection of severity; high concentrations in infected necrosis
Trypsinogen activation peptide
Early marker for acute pancreatitis and close correlation to severity
1249. Which enzyme is of diagnostic
      importance in chronic pancreatitis
 a) Amylase

 b) Pancreatic polypeptide

 c) Lipase

 d) Serum Interleukin 6 levels



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Lipase
Elevated lipase levels are more specific to the pancreas than
elevated amylase levels. Lipase levels remain high for 12 days. In
patients with chronic pancreatitis (usually caused by alcohol abuse),
lipase levels may be elevated in the presence of a normal serum
amylase level.
1250. Most common screening test for acute
      pancreatitis -
 a) Serum amylase

 b) Serum lipase

 c) Urine trypsinogen

 d) Insulin



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Urine trypsinogen
Rapid measurement of urinary trypsinogen - 2 level is useful in the
emergency department as a screening test for acute pancreatitis.
1251. Which of the following is/ are the
      imaging criteria for unresectable
      carcinoma of pancreas?
 a) Metastatic spread to vertebrae

 b) Invasion in duodenal wall

 c) Irregular increase in density of omental fat

 d) All the above



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. All the above
Metastatic spred outside the pancreas makes tumor irresectable.
Tumor invasion into adjacent organs significs unresectability.
1252. Drug of choice for palliative treatment
      of pancreatic carcinoma
 a) Erlotinib

 b) Gemcitabine

 c) Paclitaxel

 d) Cyclophosphomide



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Gemcitabine
A) Inoperable locally advanced disease-
Gemcitabine is used a the treatment of choice for these patients.
B) Metastatic Disease
Gemcitabine is the standard treatment with a median survival of 6
months and a 1-year survival rate of only 20%.
Capecitabine, an oral fluoropyrimidine, has been combined with
gemcitabine (GEM-CAP) in a phase III trial that showed an
improvement in response rate and progression-free survival over
single-agent gemcitabine, but no survival benefit.
1253.
Modified-Kaush Whipple operation is devised
to preserve which part of stomach?
 a) Fundus

 b) Body

 c) Lesser curvature

 d) Pyloric antrum



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Pyloric antrum
This procedure is also called pylorus preserving
pancreaticoduodenectomy (PPPD or pp-Kaush Whipple procedure).
It is the procedure of choice for most adenocarcinomas of the head
of pancreas.
The original pancreato- duodenectomy as proposed by Whipple
included resection of the gastric antrum.
The Whipple procedure is now reserved for situations in which the
entire duodenum has to be removed (e.g. in FAP) or where the
tumour encroaches on the first part of the duodenum or the distal
stomach and a PPPD would not achieve a clear resection margin.
1254. Which of the following causes of acute
      pancreatitis can cause recurrent bouts
      without any obvious pathology
 a) Sphincter Oddi dysfunction

 b) Pancreas divisum

 c) Hypertriglyceridemia

 d) All the above



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. All the above
Etiology-
Gall stones (most common)
Alcohol abuse is the second cause of acute pancreatitis.
Occult disease of the biliary tree or pancreatic ducts, especially
microlithiasis, sludge.
Hypertriglyceridemia
Pancreas divisum
Pancreatic cancer
Sphincter of Oddi dysfunction
Cystic fibrosis
Drugs- Steroids, Azathioprine, Valproate, Estrogens, L-
Asparaginase, 6-mercaptopurine, Sulfonamides, Tetracycline, Anti-
retroviral agents, Thiazide diuretics
Familial or genetic
Hyperparathyroidism
Hypercalemia
Post ERCP
Most common causes in children: blunt abdominal injuries,
multisystem disease (hemolytic uremic syndrome and inflammatory
bowel disease) biliary stones or microlithiasis (sludging), and drug
toxicity
1255. Pseudocyst   pancreas is developed in how much duration following an
      attack of acute pancreatitis?

 a) Less than 1 week

 b) Less than 2 weeks

 c) 3 or more weeks

 d) 4 or more weeks



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. 4 or more weeks
Pseudocysts typically arise following an attack of mild acute
pancreatitis, lie outside the pancreas, and represent an APFC that
has not resolved and matured.
Formation of a pseudocyst requires 4 weeks or more from the onset
of acute pancreatitis.
1256. Cullen's sign is seen in:
      March 2004
 a) Acute cholecystitis

 b) Acute hepatitis

 c) Acute pancreatitis

 d) Blunt injury abdomen



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C i.e. Acute pancreatitis
1257. How much percentage of the blunt
      trauma injuries to spleen in adults are
      currently managed non operatively?
 a) 30%

 b) 50%

 c) 80%

 d) 90%



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. 80%
Spleen is the intra-abdominal organ most commonly injured in a
blunt trauma to the abdomen.
Up to 80% of blunt splenic injuries can be managed non-
operatively.
It can be managed in 2 ways :
i) Non-operatively
This is now the order of the day and currently > 70% of adults with
blunt splenic injuries are managed non-operatively.
But the primary requirement for it is - hemodynamic stability.
ii) Operative management
Patients who are hemodynamically unstable or are failing non-
operative management (eg. require continuing transfusion) should
undergo operative treatment.
1258. Most prevalent symptom in patients of
      leiomyoma of esophagus is
 a) Pain

 b) Pyrosis

 c) Dysphagia

 d) Weight loss



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Dysphagia
CLINICAL FEATURES-
Asymptomatic (<5cm)
Dysphagia, pain
More common in males
Location- 2/3rd of oesophagus
1259. Following is not true about traction
      diverticulum of esophagus -
 a) Produced due to the extraluminal forces

 b) It is not a true diverticulum

 c) The outpouching is usually small and conical

 d) May develop tracheoesophageal fistula



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. It is not a true diverticulum
In traction diverticula extraluminal forces (like inflammed & scarred
peribronchial & mediastinal lymph nodes) pull the full thickness of
the esophagus out, creating a true diverticula.
Traction diverticula are much less common. They are mostly a
consequence of chronic granulomatous disease affecting the
tracheobronchial lymph nodes due to tuberculosis, atypical
mycobacteria or histoplasmosis.
Fibrotic healing of the lymph nodes exerts traction on the
oesophageal wall and produces a focal outpouching that is usually
small and has a conical shape
1260. Which of the following is false about
      zenkers diverticulum
 a) Most patients are above 50 years of age

 b) It is the most common esophageal diverticulum

 c) Mucosal outpouching through the killians triangle

 d) Cervical webs can be associated with zenkers diverticulum in
    80% of the patients



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Cervical webs can be associated with zenkers
diverticulum in 80% of the patients
Zenker diverticulum originates from the posterior wall of the
esophagus in a triangular area of weakness, limited inferiorly by the
cricopharyngeus muscle and superiorly by the inferior constrictor
muscles (ie, the Killian triangle).
Zenker's diverticulum, also pharyngoesophageal diverticulum, also
pharyngeal pouch, also hypopharyngeal diverticulum, is a
diverticulum of the mucosa of the pharynx, just above the
cricopharyngeal muscle (i.e. above the upper sphincter of the
esophagus).
It is a pseudo diverticulum (not involving all layers of the esophageal
wall).
Seen in 50years old.
1261. Dohlman procedure for-
 a) Meckel’s diverticulum

 b) Zenker’s diverticulum

 c) Dermatomyositis

 d) Menetrier’s disease



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B (Zenker’s diverticulum)
The treatment of pharyngeal pouches (Zenker’s Diverticulum) may
be by either open surgical or endoscopic techniques. The
endoscopic Dohlman’s procedure is an ideal technique in the
elderly.
1262. True about esophageal carcinoma is
 a) More lethal than the colorectal cancers

 b) These show an increasing trend towards the number of
    squamous cell carcinomas

 c) Smaller size esophageal lesions have better survival

 d) Asymptomatic benign lesions should be excised immediately



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. More lethal than the colorectal cancers
Etiology:
alcohol and smoking: for squamous cell carcinoma and
adenocarcinoma
achalasia
asbestosis
Barrett oesophagus: for adenocarcinoma
coeliac disease
ionising radiation
caustic stricture/lye stricture
Plummer-Vinson syndrome
Even when detected as a small lesion, esophageal cancer has poor
survival because of the abundant esophageal lymphatics leading to
regional lymph node metastases.
1263. Patient complains of intermittent
      dysphagia which is equal both for
      solids and liquids, which of the
      following is the most probable
      diagnosis?
a) Achalasia cardia

b) Esophageal stricture

c) Carcinoma esophagus

d) Diffuse esophageal spasm



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Diffuse esophageal spasm
Clinical features-
Hypertrophy of circular muscles
Dysphagia
Chest pain
1264. Early and late suspected instrumental
      perforation of oesophagus should first
      be assessed using
 a) Water soluble contrast swallow

 b) CT Scan

 c) Dilute barium swallon

 d) MRI



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Water soluble contrast swallow
If this is negative, a dilute barium swallow should be considered.
A CT scan can be used to replace a contrast swallow or as an
adjunct to accurately delineate specific fluid collections.
1265. Downhill esophagus varices develop as
      a result of obstruction of seen in
 a) Portal vein

 b) Hepatic vein

 c) Superior vena cava

 d) Inferior vena cava



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Superior vena cava
Downhill varicesare produced by the obstruction of the superior vena
cava, which results in collateral drainage from the head, neck and
upper extremity venous systems into the veins surrounding the mid
and upper thoracic esophagus and into the azygous vein. On CT
varices appear as enhancing tubular regions in the periesophageal
region. This density is equal to the venous blood pool.
1266. Most common impacted foreign body in
      esophagus in children is
 a) Coin

 b) Food product

 c) Krayon

 d) Marble



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Coin
Coins are the most commonly impacted foreign bodies in children in
esophagus and oropharynx followed by the food products
1267. Which of the following is not true about
      medical management of uncomplicated
      GERD?
 a) PPIs are the most effective drug treatment for GORD

 b) Household measure of tilting the bed is efficatious

 c) Long term PPI therapy increases risk of malignant changes

 d) Adequate dose of PPI for 8 weeks is the recommended
    treatment



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Long term PPI therapy increases risk of malignant
changes
Treatment-
1. Lifestyle modification with avoiding or cessation of smoking, tea/
coffee, alcohol.
2. Drugs-
PPI- antisecretory drugs
Antaacids with alginate
Prokinetic- itopride (50mg TID) (Cisapride and mosapride not
recommended as it causes cardiac arrhythmia)
LES sphincter is relaxed by nitrates, atropine and calcium channel
blocker.
3. Mucosa protective agents- sucralfate colloidal bismuth
4. Endotherapy- plexiglass minosphere (PMMA)
5. Surgery- antireflux surgery
1268. Single drug regimen for carcinoma
      esophagus which shows significant
      decrease in tumor size in 15 - 20% of
      patients incorporates which drug?
 a) Cisplatin

 b) Bleomycin

 c) Doxorubicin

 d) Vincristine



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Cisplatin
Significant reductions in the size of measurable tumor masses have
been reported in 15-25% of patients given single-agent cisplatin
treatment and in 30-60% of patients treated with drug combinations
that include cisplatin.
1269. Most common type of Hiatal hernia is
 a) Sliding

 b) Rolling

 c) Mixed

 d) None of the above



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Sliding
There are 4 types of hiatal hernia
Type I : Sliding hernia (most common type - 70 - 80%)
Type II : Paraesophageal or rolling hernia
Type III : Mixed
Type IV : Tese hernias are distinguished by the presence of other
abdominal viscera wihin the defect i.e. omentum, transverse colon.
1270. In corrosive injury of esophagus correct
      statement is all except
 a) Alkalis are usually ingested in larger volumes

 b) Alkalis cause more gastic damage than acids

 c) Alkalis form fibrous scar

 d) Acids form eschar



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Alkalis cause more gastic damage than acids
In general, alkalis are relatively odourless and tasteless, making
them more likely to be ingested in large volume.
Alkalis cause liquefaction, saponification of fats, dehydration and
thrombosis of blood vessels that usually leads to fibrous scarring.
Acids cause coagulative necrosis with eschar formation, and this
coagulant may limit penetration to deeper layers of the oesophageal
wall.
Acids also cause more gastric damage than alkalis because of the
induction of intense pylorospasm with pooling in the antrum.
1271. An individual of age 40 yrs presents
      with dysphagia to both solids and
      liquids with symptoms of regurgitation.
      Patient also complaints of chest pain
      and weight loss. Which of the following
      is the preferred investigation for
      diagnosis of this pathology?
 a) Barium swallow X-ray

 b) Barium swallow X-ray with esophageal manometry

 c) Barium swallow X-ray woith esophageal manometry with
    endoscopy

 d) None of the above



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Barium swallow X-ray with esophageal manometry
Barium swallow- shows cucumber oesophagus or birds beak or
pencil tip deformity.
Oesophageal manometry-
Characteristics of achalasia cardia
Hypertensive LOS
Aperistalsis in the body of oesophagus
Barium swallow shows a dilated esophagus with tapering narrowing
in the terminal end of esophagus, described as ‘BIRD BEAK’
appearance.
1272. Most accurate method for the diagnosis
      Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease
      (GERD) is
 a) Histological study

 b) Manometry

 c) 24-hour pH recording and electrical impedance measurement

 d) Barium swallow studies

 e) Upper GI endoscopy



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. 24-hour pH recording and electrical impedance
measurement
The most sensitive test for diagnosis of GERD is 24-h ambulatory
pH monitoring.
Endoscopy is indicated in patients with reflux symptoms refractory to
antisecretory therapy; in those with alarming symptoms such as
dysphagia, weight loss, or gastrointestinal bleeding; and in those
with recurrent dyspepsia after treatment that is not clearly due to
reflux on clinical grounds alone
pH was less than 4
1273. Which of the following tumors most
      commonly presents with upper
      gastrointestinal bleeding?
 a) Primary gastric cancer

 b) Esophageal carcinoma

 c) Metastases to stomach

 d) Hepatic adenocarcinoma



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Primary gastric cancer
Tumor bleeding accounts for up to 5% of upper gastrointestinal
bleeding (UGIB) cases.
1274. Which of the following is true about
      gastric ulcer but not the duodenal
      ulcer?
 a) Pain rarely occurs at night

 b) Melena is more common than hematemesis

 c) Usually occurs in 40 - 50 yrs of age

 d) Pain is relieved with ingestion of food



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Pain rarely occurs at night
1275. The most commonly practiced
      operative procedure for a perforated
      duodenal ulcer is -
 a) Vagotomy and pyloroplasty

 b) Vagotomy and antrectomy

 c) Vagotomy and perforation closure

 d) Graham's omentum patch repair



Correct Answer - D
Ans. is 'd' i.e., Graham's omentum patch repair
1276. Not true about highly selective
      vagotomy -
 a) It is also known parietal cell vagotomy

 b) Nerves of Latarjet are sacrifised

 c) Recurrence rates are higher than vagotomy and drainage and
    vagotomy and antrestomy.

 d) Entire gastric reservoir capacity is preserved



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Nerves of Latarjet are sacrifised
In Highly selective vagotomy (also known as parietal cell vagotomy
or proximal gastric vagotomy) the vagal innervation to the antrum
and pylorus (nerves of Latarjet) are preserved, only the vagal supply
to the proximal two-thirds of stomach (where essentially all the
parietal cells are located) is cut. This preserves gastric motility.
1277. Simplest investigation to be performed
      in suspected cases of gastric cancer is
      -
 a) Double contrast radiography

 b) Plain radiography

 c) CT Scan

 d) Endoscopy



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C Ct scan
Investigation for diagnosis of gastric cancer:
* Ultrasound and CT scan
  - To rule out secondaries in the liver.
  - To look for enlarged coeliac nodes.
  - Can detect ascites-guided fluid tap and cell cytology.
  - To detect Krukenberg tumour (pelvic CT).
  - Useful in detecting metastatic disease.
1278. The features of crohns disease are all
      except ?
a) Lymphoid hyperplasia

b) Skin lesion

c) Transmural involvement

d) Crypt Abscess



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Lymphoid hyperplasia
Intermittent mild diarrhea, fever, abdominal pain (MC)
Right lower quadrant mass, weight loss, anemia
Sometimes mimics appendicitis or bowel perforation
Anal complaints (fissure, fistula, abscess) – frequent
Fat/vitamin malabsorption present
Recurrence after surgery common
Malignancy (most common cause) + with colon involvement
String sign of Kantor is seen in Crohn's Disease.
Creeping fat is a feature of Crohn's Disease.
1279. True about small intestinal tumor is -
 a) Lymphomas are the most common small intestinal tumors

 b) Carcinoids are more common in the duodenum and jejunum

 c) Adenomatous polyps are more common in the terminal ileum

 d) Risk of developing small bowel tumor correlates positively with
    colorectal cancer



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Risk of developing small bowel tumor correlates
positively with colorectal cancer
The second most common small bowel tumor is carcinoid
accounting for35% of all small bowel carcinomas, 90% of which are
located in the ileum.
Lymphomas account for the third most common tumors of the small
bowel.
Adenomatous polyps tend to occur in the periampullary region and
proximal jejunum, close to the entrance of bile and pancreatic
secretions into small intestine.
1280. Contraindication for colostomy
      planning are all except -
 a) Age > 60 yrs

 b) Stoma near skin creases and bony prominences

 c) Poorly motivated patient for elective stomy

 d) Stomas through previous scars



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Age > 60 yrs
The patient must be explained the procedure and properly motivated
for taking care of the stoma
The stoma should preferably be through rectus abdominis ( to
prevent prolapse and parastomal hernias)
It should be through flat surface of abdomen
It should avoid skin creases and bony prominences
It should be away from previous scars
1281. Colonoscopy is are not indicated in -
a) MEN 2B

b) FAP

c) HNPCC

d) Cornkite canada syndrome



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. MEN 2B
MEN 2B does not predispose to colon cancer.
FAP, HNPCC, Cronkite Canada Syndrome predispose to Colon
Cancer and hence screening with colonoscopy is needed
1282. Critical diameter of caecum when
      perforation is considered eminent in
      pseudo-obstruction is -
 a) >7 cm

 b) >8 cm

 c) >9 cm

 d) >10 cm



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. >9 cm
It is defined as large bowel distention resulting from chronic
impairment of motility.
The degree of colonic distention may be severe enough to cause
caecal perforation.
Imminenet perforation of caecum is considered when the caecal
diameter exceeds the critical diameter of 9cm (>9cm).
1283. Exception to Goodsals rule is
      considered when the anterior external
      opening is more situated more than
      cms from anal margin -
 a) 2

 b) 3

 c) 4

 d) 5



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. 3
Goodsall's Rule
Is used to determine the location of internal opening
According to it :
Fistulas with external opening anterior to horizontal imaginary line
drawn across the mid point of anus connect to the internal opening
by short straight tract.
Fistulas with external opening posterior to the horizontal line - run a
curvilinear course and open internally into the posterior midline.
1284. Treatment of choice for low fistula in
      ano is -
 a) Fistulotomy

 b) Intravenous antibiotics

 c) Staged surgical resection

 d) None of the above



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Fistulotomy
It is divided into 2 types - high & low, according to whether their
internal openings is below or above the anorectal ring.
The importance of deciding whether a fistula is a low or a high type
is that a low level can be treated by fistulotomy (opening the tract)
without causing damage to the sphincter.
1285. Staging of rectal carcinoma is best
      done by -
 a) CT Scan

 b) MRI

 c) TRUS

 d) All the above



Correct Answer - B
Answer-B
90% of rectal growths can be felt by per-rectal examination
High-resolution phased array external MRI is the investigation of
choice for local issues in the primary staging of rectal
cancer (best investigation for staging) as well as for restaging
after NACT-RT. It provides the highest accuracy for issues in
pretreatment local staging
Investigation of choice – rigid sigmoidoscopy and biopsy
To assess local spread – TRUS (Endoluminal ultrasound)
For local staging and assessment of proposed circumferential
resection margin – MRI (CT is not accurate in local staging)
1286. Rolled up omentum is seen in cases of -
 a) Peritoneal tuberculosis

 b) Peritoneal metastases

 c) Perforation peritonitis

 d) Malrotation of gut



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Peritoneal tuberculosis
The classic appearance of greyish white military nodules scattered
over the peritoneum. In addition fibrous bands and adhesions are
common.
The omentum may become thickened presenting as a transversely
placed mass (rolled up omentum).
Clinically the most frequent presentation of the peritoneal disease is
ascites.
1287. Pantaloon hernia is also called as -
 a) Dual hernia

 b) Saddle bag hernia

 c) Bochdaleks hernia

 d) Retrosternal hernia



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Saddle bag hernia
It is also called dual or saddle bag hernia.
This type of hernia consists of two sacs that straddle the inferior
epigastric artery, one sac being medial and the other lateral to this
vessel.
1288. Which of the following famous
      personalities had hydrocele associated
      with hernia, which proved to be fatal?
 a) Edward Gibbon

 b) Thomas Edison

 c) Miley Wright

 d) Neil Armstrong



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Edward Gibbon
Edward gibbon (1737-1794), english historian had large hydrocele.
The hydrocele was associated with a large scrotal hernia which
probably was punctured.
1289. In case of female commonest hernia is
      ?
 a) Direct inguinal hernia

 b) Indirect inguinal hernia

 c) Femoral Hernia

 d) Incisional hernia



Correct Answer - B
Ans is 'b' ie Indirect Inguinal hernia
In Indirect inguinal hernia the contents of the abdomen enter the
deep inguinal ring and traverse the whole length of the inguinal
canal to come out through the superficial inguinal ring.
It is the most common of all forms of hernia.
It is most common in the young (cf a direct hernia is most common
in the old)
Femoral hernias occur most commonly in women but lower
incidence overall than inguinal hernias.
1290. 40 years male presents with translucent
      scrotal swelling in which it is possible
      to get above the swelling on
      examination. What is the most probable
      diagnosis?
 a) Hydrocele

 b) Indirect inguinal hernia

 c) Varicocele

 d) Sebaceous cyst



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Hydrocele
Hydroceles are typically translucent and it is possible to 'get above
the swelling' on examination of the scrotum.
A hydrocele is an abnormal collection of serious fluid in a part of the
processus vaginalis, usually the tunica.
Encysted hydrocele of the cord is a smooth oval swelling near the
spermatic cord, which is liable to be mistaken for an inguinal hernia.
The swelling moves downwards and becomes less mobile if the
testis is pulled gently downwards
1291. Scrotal swelling non reducible but
      disappears when the child wakes up
      from sleep is most likely to be -
 a) Congenital hydrocele

 b) Varicocele

 c) Indirect inguinal hernia

 d) None of the above



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Congenital hydrocele
In congenital hydrocele the communication with peritoneal cavity is
usually too small to allow herniation of intra-abdominal contents.
Usually hydrocele is a non reducible swelling but congenital
hydrocele can passively get drained through intact tunics vaginalis
due to gravity while sleeping.
Both varicocele and indirect inguinal hernia are reducible scotal
swelling.
So the most probable answer is Congenital hydrocele
  1292. Treatment of congenital hydrocephalus
        is -
    a) Ventriculoperitoneal shunt

    b) Sterestactic radio surgery

    c) Diuretics

    d) Radiotherapy



   Correct Answer - A
   Answer- A. Ventriculoperitoneal shunt
   Congenital Hydrocephalus - Treatment Options
1. Ventriculoperitoneal shunt
2. Endoscopic third ventriculostomy
3. Lumbar puncture (temporary measure till a shunt is put)
1293. True of umbilical hernia -
 a) Most common content is large intestine

 b) Most of the umbilical hernias disappear spontaneously

 c) Males are affected more than females

 d) Uncomplicated herenias are repaired at 1 year of age through
    an infraumbilical incision.



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Most of the umbilical hernias disappear
spontaneously
Umbilical hernia develops due to either absence of umbilical fascia
or incomplete closure of umbilical defect in infants.
Umbilical hernia (paraumbilical hernia) is a protusion or herniation
through linea alba just above or below umbilicus.
Weakest part is umbilical cicatrix.
Contents are- greater omentum, small intestine and transverse
colon.
CLINICAL FEATURES-
Females in 5th decade
Swelling has smooth surface, distinct edges resonant with dragging
pain.
Expansile impulse on patient coughing
Surgical treatment is indicated if
Hernia persists at 2 years of age or older.
If the defect is mor than 2 cm in size.
If it is associate with complications.
Heriorrhaphy (surgery for repair of hernia) is done through an
infraumbilical incision. Defect is closed with interrupted sutures after
ligating the sac.
1294. A 10 years old male presents a smooth
      swelling near superficial inguinal ring,
      which moves downwards when the
      testicle is pulled downwards. Diagnosis
      -
 a) Inguinal hernia

 b) Congenital hydrocele

 c) Encysted hydrocele of the cord

 d) Varicocele



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Encysted hydrocele of the cord
A hydrocoele develops in a remnant of the processus vaginalis
somewhere along the course of the spermatic cord. This hydrocoele
also transilluminates, and is known as an encysted hydrocoele of the
cord.
The swelling moves downwards and becomes less mobile if the
testis is pulled gently downwards.
In females, a multicystic hydrocoele of the canal of Nuck sometimes
presents as a swelling in the groin.
1295. Physiological adhesions between
      foreskin and glans penis persist until
      years of age -
 a) 4

 b) 5

 c) 6

 d) 7



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. 6
Phimosis is a condition in which the foreskin of the penis cannot be
pulled back past the glans.
The physiological adhesions between the foreskin and the glans
penis may persist until 6 years of age or more, giving the false
impression that the prepuce will not retract.
1296. Commonest site of hypospadias is -
 a) Just proximal to glans

 b) In the meid of penis

 c) Scrotum

 d) Perineum



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Just proximal to glans
Hypospadias is a condition in which the urethral meatus opens on
the underside of penis or the perineum (i.e. ventral surface of penis)
proximal to the tip of the glans penis.
1297. Best time for surgery of hypospadias is
      at what age -
 a) 0 - 4 months

 b) 4 - 6 months

 c) 6 - 10 months

 d) > 2 years



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. 6 - 10 months
Operations for hypospadiasis are routinely performed when the
patient is between 6 and 18 months of age.
The infant has good tolerance to surgery and anesthesia by the age
of 6 months. The child is well aware of his genitalia and toilet training
by the age of 18 months. So, the most suitable age for the operation
of hypospadias is between 6 and 18 months.
The degree of hypospadias dictates the need for repair. If the
opening is glanular or coronal (85% of patients), the penis is usually
functional both for micturition and procreation and repair is done
primarily for cosmetic reasons. Openings that are more proximal on
the shaft require correction to allow voiding while standing, normal
erection, and proper sperm deposition during intercourse.
The commonest procedure for distal hypospadias is the
‘tubularized incised plate’ urethroplasty, while techniques that
utilize the foreskin are commonly used for more proximal
hypospadias.
Complications of hypospadias surgery:
urethrocutaneous fistula (most common)
Recurrence of chordee
Urethral stricture
Meatal stenosis
Infection
1298. Which one of the following statement is
      true of undescended testis -
 a) Usually descends spontaneously at puberty

 b) Orchipexy to be done if no descent by puberty

 c) Has a higher incidence of malignancy

 d) Maintains normal sperm production



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., Has a higher incidence of malignancy
TREATMENT-
* Orchidopexy done before 6 months of age
* Orchidectomy- patient with incomplete descended testis is
atrophic, past puberty and normal testis
* Ombredanne’s operation in bilateral cases
* HCG or GnRH- cryptorchidism associated with hypogenitalism and
obesity
* Approximately UDT spontaneously descend by 3 months of age
* Secondary sexual characterstics are normal
1299. Most common site of penile carcinoma
      is -
 a) Glans

 b) Prepuce

 c) Shaft

 d) Coronal sulcus



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Glans
When it occurs on the glans penis, it is known as erythroplasia of
Queyrat and when it occurs on the shaft of the penis it is called
Bowen's disease.
Carcinoma of the penis is most typically a squamous cell carcinoma
arising in the skin of the glans penis or the prepuce.
MC orginates from glans > sulcus > prepuce > shaft
1300. Which of the following are the treatment
      options for cystocele?
 a) Anterior colporrhaphy

 b) Transvaginal tape

 c) Transobturator tape

 d) All the above



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. All the above
Traditionally; an anterior vaginal wall repair (anterior colporrhaphy)
was performed vaginally; now replaced by vaginally inserted tape
[transvaginal tape (TVT) or transobturator tape (TOT)] or mesh
slings.
1301. Traditionally scrotal carcinoma is
      associated with which of the following
      occupations?
 a) Chimney sweeps

 b) Mule spinners

 c) Coal worker

 d) Wood workers



Correct Answer - A
Answer- (A) Chimney sweeps
Carcinoma of the scrotum.
It is traditionally recognized as an occupational hazard for chimney
sweeps and mule spinners.
It was described by Potts.
It was the first cancer linked to occupational exposure when, in
1775, Perivall Pott described it in chimney sweeps in England. Other
occupations that had a preponderance of the disease included
people who worked with the distillates of coal and men exposed to
mineral oil.
1302. What is the main hazard of ectopic
      testis -
 a) Impotence

 b) Carcinoma development

 c) Liable to injury

 d) Hernia development



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Liable to injury
The main hazard is liability to injury.
1303. 40 years old male complains of loin
      pain since 1 month. Patient's complaint
      of pain has severely increased over last
      2 hours and pain now radiates from loin
      and to groin and anterior thigh and
      patient is writhing in bed for comfort.
      What is the most probable etiology?
 a) Bladder calculus

 b) Ureteric calculus

 c) Vesico ureteric reflux

 d) Hydronephrosis



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Ureteric calculus
There is a pattern of severe exacerbation on a background of
continuing pain
Radiates to the groin, penis, scrotum or labium as the stone
progresses down the ureter
The severity of pain is not related to the size of the stone
The pain is almost invariably associated with haematuria
There may be few physical signs
1304. Treatment of choice for bladder stone
a) Transurethral litholapaxy

b) Percutaneous suprapubic litholapaxy

c) Vesicotomy and stone retrieval

d) Intravenous antibiotics



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Transurethral litholapaxy
TREATMENT-
A transurethral cystolitholapaxy is the most
common procedure used to treat adults with bladder stones.
Small stone- Ultrasound lithotripsy
Large stone- laser lithotripsy
Litholapaxy- cystoscopic lithotrite
Suprapubic cystolithotomy
1305. Following are the sign/s suggestive of
      obstruction of urinary tract on CT Scan
 a) Hyroureter

 b) Perinephric stranding

 c) Thickening of the lateroconal fascia

 d) All the above



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. All the above
Nonenhanced CT has been accepted as the imaging modality of
choice in the radiologic evaluation of patients suspected of having
urolithiasis.
CT is superior to other imaging modalities in the diagnostic accuracy
and assessment of their characteristics.
The most direct sign of ureterolithiasis is the stone within the ureteral
lumen, with proximal ureteral dilatation and normal distal caliber.
Other favorable secondary signs at CT are: Hydroureter,
hydronephrosis, perinephric stranding, periureteral edema and
unilateral renal enlargement.
1306. Harder renal stone having less
      satisfactory results with ECWL is -
 a) Oxalate stone

 b) Phosphate stone

 c) Urate stone

 d) Cystine stone



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Cystine stone
Extracorporeal Shockwave Lithotripsy (ECWL):
A urinary calculus has a crystalline structure. Bombarded with shock
waves of sufficient energy it disintegrates into fragments.
The clearance of stone from the kidney using ESWL will depend
upon the consistency of the stone and its site.
Most oxalate and phosphate stones fragment well.
1307.
Radical nephrectomy involves resection of
the following except -
 a) Gerotas fascia

 b) Ipsilateral adrenal gland

 c) Surrounding hilar lymph nodes

 d) Proximal para-aortic lymph nodes



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Proximal para-aortic lymph nodes
The standard management for stage I or II tumors and selected
cases of stage III disease is radical nephrectomy.
This procedure involves en bloc removal of Gerota's fascia and its
contents, including the kidney, the ipsilateral adrenal gland, and
adjacent hilar lymph nodes.
1308. Normal urine flow rate in healthy adults
      in urodynamic study is -
 a) 10 ml/sec

 b) 20 ml/sec

 c) 25 ml/sec

 d) 5 ml/sec



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. 20 ml/sec
Ages 14 to 45 -- The average flow rate for males is 21 mL/sec. The
average flow rate for females is 18 mL/sec.
Ages 46 to 65 -- The average flow rate for males is 12 mL/sec. The
average flow rate for females is 18 mL/sec.
Ages 66 to 80 -- The average flow rate for males is 9 mL/sec. The
average flow rate for females is 18 mL/sec.
1309. Dermoepidermal burn is what degree of
      burn -
 a) I

 b) II

 c) III

 d) IV



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. II
Dermoepidermal burns are Superficial II degree burns.
1310. Revascularization and angiogenesis
      process after skin grafting is seen after
      how many days after the procedure?
 a) 4

 b) 5

 c) 6

 d) 7



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. 5
Revascularization or angiogenesis
After approx 5 days, revascularization occurs and the graft
demonstrates both arterial inflow and venous outflow.
1311. The most commonly used
      myocutaneous pedicle graft for pelvis
      surgeries contains muscle segments
      from -
 a) Rectus abdominis muscle

 b) External oblique muscle

 c) Internal oblique muscle

 d) Transversus abdominis muscle



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Rectus abdominis muscle
The most frequently used myocutneous pedicle grafts contain,
muscle segments from the rectus abdominis muscle of the anterior
abdominal wall, gracialis muscle of the inner thigh, bulbocavernosus
muscle of the vulva, the tensor fascia lata muscle of the lateral thigh,
and gluteus maximus muscle.
1312. Kernahen's striped 'Y' classification,
      Main reference point is -
 a) Incisive foramen

 b) Soft palate

 c) Hard palate

 d) Third molar



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Incisive foramen
Kernahen's striped 'Y' classification
It is used to classify cleft lip and cleft palate
The incisive foramen is taken as reference point
1313. LAHSAL code is used to represent
      congenital malformation of -
a) Lip

b) Alveolus

c) Hard and soft palate

d) All the above



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. All the above
1314. What is the meaning of the French word
      "Debridement"
 a) Unleash or Cut Open

 b) Debulk

 c) Sanitize

 d) Rehydration



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Unleash or Cut Open
Taken from the French meaning to 'unleash or cut open',
debridement has come to mean more than simply the laying open of
tissues. It plays a crucial part in the management of trauma.
1315. Cardinal rule for dressing of pressure
      ulcer is to -
 a) Keep ulcer tissue dry and surrounding intact tissue dry

 b) Keep ulcer tissue dry and surrounding intact tissue moist

 c) Keep ulcer tissue moist and surrounding intact tissue dry

 d) Keep the ulcer tissue moist and surrounding intact tissue moist



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Keep ulcer tissue moist and surrounding intact
tissue dry
An ideal dressing should protect the wound, be biocompatible and
provide ideal hydration.
The type of the ulcer bed and the desired dressing function
determine the type of dressing needed.
The cardinal rule is to keep the ulcer tissue moist and the
surrounding intact tissue dry.
1316. Outcome of burns depends on -
 a) Extent of burns

 b) Type of resuscitation fluid

 c) Maintenance of airway

 d) Skin grafting



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Extent of burns
The various factors influencing the outcome of burns are :
Extent of burns
Depth of burns
Timing of first Escharectomy (removes devitalized tissue and hence
source of infection)
Age and medical comorbidities
1317. All of the following are true regarding
      fluid resuscitation in burn patients
      except:
 a) Consider intravenous resuscitation in children with burns
    greater than 15% TBSA

 b) Oral fluids must contain salts

 c) Most preferred fluid is Ringer's lactate

 d) Half of the calculated volume of fluid should be given in first 8
    hours



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A: Consider intravenous resuscitation in children with
burns greater than 15% TBSA
In children with burns over 10% TBSA and adults with 15% TBS,
consider the need for intravenous fluid resuscitation.
If oral resuscitation is to be commenced, it is important that the
water given is not salt free.
Preferred fluid: Lactated Ringer's Solution, because it is:
* Isotonic
* Cheap
* Easily stored
  - Resuscitation formulas: Parkland formula most commonly used
  - Fluid calculation: 4 x weight in kg x %TBSA burn
  - Give 1/2 of that volume in the first 8 hours. Give other 1/2 in next
16 hours
  - TBSA: Total burns surface area.
1318. The best treatment for cystic hygroma
      is -
 a) Surgical excision

 b) Radiotherapy

 c) Sclerotherapy

 d) Chemotherapy



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Surgical Excision
Definitive treatment is complete excision of the cyst at an early age.
1319. A patient after road traffic accident
      presented with tension pneumothorax.
      What is the first line of management?
 a) Insert wide bore needle in 2nd intercostal space

 b) Immediate chest X-ray

 c) CT scanEmergency thoracotomy

 d) Emergency thoracotomy



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Insert wide bore needle in 2nd intercostal space
First line of management in tension pneumothorax: Insert wide bore
needle in 2nd intercostal space.
1320. Preferred treatment for oral tongue
      carcinoma which infiltrates the local
      cortical bone is -
 a) Subtotal glossectomy

 b) Subtotal glossectomy + selective neck dissection

 c) Subtotal glossectomy + selective neck dissection +
    mandibulectomy

 d) Total glossectomy + selective neck dissection +
    mandibulectomy



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Subtotal glossectomy + selective neck dissection +
mandibulectomy
The management plan for locally advanced tongue carcinomas
includes subtotal glossectomy + selective neck dissection +
mandibulectomy.
Advanced tumors (T3 and T4) often encroach upon the floor of the
mouth and, occasionally, the mandible.
In these circumstances, a resection of the tongue and floor of the
mouth and mandible is required.
1321. For lower lip carcinoma of <1cm in size.
      The treatment of choice will be-
 a) Radiation

 b) Chemotherapy

 c) Excision

 d) Radiation and chemotherapy



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Excision
Small tumors (T1 & T2) (<2cm) - If 1/3rd or less than 1/3rd lip
involved- V or W-shaped excision + primary closure.
Excision of lower lip upto 1/3rd can be sutured primarily in 3 layers –
mucosa, muscle, and skin keeping vermillion border in proper
apposition.
1322.
Upto Level III lymph node dissection is done
for which nodal status of oropharyngeal
cancer?
a) N1

b) N2

c) N3

d) N4



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. N1
Management of neck
NO Selective neck dissection
Oral Cavity at least levels l-lll
Oropharynx at least levels ll-lV
N1-N2a-c Selective or comprehensive neck
Level Vl    Subglottic laryngeal cancers
1323. Hoarseness of voice in lung carcinoma
      is due to invasion of which structure?
 a) Recurrent laryngeal nerve

 b) Internal laryngeal nerve

 c) Glossopharyngeal nerve

 d) Vagus nerve



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Recurrent laryngeal nerve
Hoarseness- Recurrent laryngeal nerve invasion
1324. Acral lentigines type of malignant
      melanoma occurs in -
a) Face

b) Nape of neck

c) Mucosa

d) Sun exposed areas



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Mucosa
Acral lentiginous-
Least common with worst prognosis
MC site- sole, mucosa
1325. Which of the following provides
      excellent details about the
      chemodectomas?
 a) Xray

 b) CT angiography

 c) MRI

 d) PET SCAN



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. MRI
MRI scanning provides excellent detail in most cases of
chemodectomas.
1326. Hemorrhage commonly seen with trivial
      trauma in elderly -
 a) Subdural hemorrhage

 b) Extradural hemorrhage

 c) Subarachnoid hemorrhage

 d) Intraparenchymal hemorrhage



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Subdural hemorrhage
Subdural hemorrhage frequently occurs in older adults, after
apparently trivial trauma and is often related to a fall in which there is
no direct trauma to the head.
Recurrent trivial trauma in elderly is the most common cause of
subdural hemorrhage developing.
1327. Most common organ injured in
      penetrating injury of the abdomen:
 a) Liver

 b) Spleen

 c) Small bowel

 d) none of these



Correct Answer - C
Ans- C- Small Bowel
The most common cause is a stab or gunshot.
The most common organs injured are the small bowel (50%), large
bowel (40%), liver (30%), and intra-abdominal vascular (25%).
When the injury is close range, there is more kinetic energy than
those injuries sustained from a distance. Even though most gunshot
wounds typically have a linear projection, the high-energy wounds
are associated with unpredictable injuries.
There may also be secondary missile injuries from bone or bullet
fragments. Stab wounds that penetrate the abdominal wall
are difficult to assess.
   1328. Indication for surgical compartment
         release in compartment Syndrome in
         any compartment is absolute pressure
         greater than?
    a) 15 mm Hg

    b) 20 mm Hg

    c) 30 mm Hg

    d) Varies from compartment to compartment



   Correct Answer - C
   30 mm Hg REF: With text
   "Setting the threshold for fasciotomy at a perfusion pressure of 30
   mmHg can be considered safe, but still may lead to overtreatment if
   used routinely" REF: Evidence-based Orthopedics - Mohit Bhandari
   Page 634
   Different authors consider surgical intervention if: (REF: Tiwari A,
   Haq A I, Myint F, Hamilton G. Acute compartment syndromes. Br J
   Surg 2002; 89: 397-412.)
1. Absolute ICP greater than 30 mmHg
2. Difference between diastolic pressure and ICP greater than 30
   mmHg
3. Difference between mean arterial pressure and ICP greater than 40
   mmHg
   "Intracompartmental pressure may be measured by the wick
   catheter in patients suspected to have compartment syndrome. By
   such method a pressure of 30 mm Hg or more sustained for 6-8
   hours or more is a likely indication for decompressive fasciotomy"
   REF: Skeletal injury in the child by John Anthony Ogden Page 317
   IntracompartmentalComments
Intracompartmental Comments
pressure
                   Normal compartment pressure of lower
<15 mm Hg
                   limbs
                   Venous drainage from closed myofascial
>25 mm Hg
                   spaces is impaired.
>30 mm Hg          Complete venous collapse
>60 mm Fig         Neuromuscular ischemia
REF: Mastery of vascular and endovascular surgery - Gerald B.
Zelenock, Thomas S. Huber, Louis M. Messina Page 507
1329. A child swallowed a watch battery
      containing alkaline content. What next -
a) Immediate X-ray measurements

b) Remove surgically immediately

c) CT abdomen

d) Laxatives



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Immediate X-ray measurements
Alkaline dry cell batteries contain :
Sodium hydroxide
Potassium hydroxide
1330. Burr hole is done for -
 a) Chronic SDH

 b) EDH

 c) SAH

 d) Contusion



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Chronic SDH
Liquefied SDHs are commonly treated with drainage through one or
two burr holes placed over the thickest aspects of the hematoma.
Many surgeons place frontal and parietal burr holes that later can be
incorporated into a frontotemporoparietal craniotomy, if needed.
1331. Typical of rectus sheath hematoma is -
 a) Severe tenderness

 b) Bluish discoloration

 c) Firm painful mass

 d) Ecchymosis



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Firm painful mass
Clinical features of rectus sheath hematoma
A) Symptoms
Common historical features of rectus sheath hematoma (RSH)
include acute abdominal pain, fever, nausea, and vomiting.
B) Signs
i) Vital signs
A low-grade fever is common in rectus sheath hematoma. The
hematoma can be large enough to compromise intravascular
volume, with resultant signs of hypovolemic shock including
hypotension, tachycardia, and tachypnea.
ii) Abdominal examination
Typically, the abdominal examination reveals a palpable, painful,
firm, nonpulsatile abdominal mass corresponding to the rectus
sheath. The mass may be bilobar with a central groove. The mass
does not move with respiration. Because the hematoma is deep to
the subcutaneous tissue and rectus muscles, the mass is not always
palpable, particularly in obese patients.
1332. Percuteneous chemical lumbar
      sympathectomy is practised using -
 a) Phenol

 b) Ethanol

 c) Formalin

 d) Acetic acid



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Phenol
Chemical sympathectomy requires the injection of small quantities of
dilute aqueous phenol into the lumbar sympathetic chain under
radiographic control.
1333. Which of the following is spared in
      lumbar sympathectomy:
      September 2009
 a) L1

 b) L2

 c) L3

 d) L4



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A: Ll
To preserve sexual functions, Ll is preserved.
1334. Most commonly performed and
      acceptable method of bariatric surgery
      is:
 a) Biliopancreatic diversion

 b) Biliopancreatic diversion with ilcostomy

 c) Laparoscopic gastric banding

 d) Roux-en-Y gastric bypass.



Correct Answer - D
Ans: D. Roux-en-Y gastric bypass.
(Ref. Sabiston 20/e p1187, 19/e p363; Schwartz 10/e p1112, 9/952;
Harrison 19/p2398).
Roux-en-Y gastric bypass:
Most commonly performed & acceptable method of bariatric surgery.
3 restrictive-malabsorptive bypass procedures:
Combine elements of gastric restriction & selective malabsorption.
Procedures include Roux-en-Y gastric bypass, biliopancreatic
diversion & biliopancreatic diversion with duodenal switch.
Roux-en-Y:
Most commonly undertaken & most accepted bypass procedure.
Performed with an open incision or by laparoscopy.
1335. Which of the following electrolyte
      abnormalities can be seen after brain
      injury?
 a) Hyponatremia

 b) Hyperkalemia

 c) Hypomagnesemia

 d) All the above



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A
Electrolyte abnormalities occur in 60% of the patients with head
injury.
Patients with brain injury are at a high risk for the development
of electrolyte imbalance including hyponatremia, hypocalemia,
hypophosphatemia as well as hypokalemia and (to a lesser degree)
Hypomagnesemia.
So the appropriate answer will be hyponatremia.
1336. Neuroimaging features of
      neurocysticercosis are considered as
      criteria for definitive diagnosis -
 a) Major

 b) Minor

 c) Probable

 d) Absolute



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Major
Evidence of lesions highly suggestive of neurocysticercosis on
neuroimaging studies
Positive serum immunoblot for the detection of anticysticercal
antibodies
Resolution of intracranial cystic lesions after therapy with
albendazole or praziquantel
Spontaneous resolution of small single enhancing lesions.
1337. Features of marasmus are all except :
 a) Absence of anasarca

 b) Increased appetite

 c) Excessive catabolism of adipose tissue and muscle protein

 d) Uncompensated phase of PEM



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Uncompensated phase of PEM
It is due to prolong deficiency of calories and proteins. Thus there is
exessive catabolism of adipose tissue and muscle protein.
It is characterized by gross wasting of muscle and subcutaneous
tissues resulting in emaciation and marked stunting.
Child may show voracious appetite.
Marasmus represents the compensated phase of PEM.
  1338. All of the following are causes of
        pseudoparalysis except
    a) Osteomyelitis

    b) Scurvy

    c) Septic arthritis

    d) Polio



   Correct Answer - D
   Answer- D. Polio
   Causes of pseudoparalysis
1. Scurvy (vitamin C deficiency)
2. Osteomyelitis
3. Septic (arthritis)
4. Congenital syphilis
1339. Which of the following can lead to
      regression of developmental
      milestones
 a) Rett's syndrome

 b) Autism

 c) Neuromuscular diseases

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. All of the above
The hallmark of many degenerative disorders is neurological
regression.
Loss of only language skills – autism – suspected.
Regression of both language and motor milestones → Rett's
syndrome.
1340. All of the following are features of Rett's
      syndrome except
 a) Microcephaly

 b) Regression of milestones

 c) Cardia arrhythmias

 d) Focal Convulsions



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Focal Convulsions
This is the characteristic features, that they begin to loose their
acquired skills, e.g., cognitive and head growth is normal during
early period after which there is an arrest of growth.
Acquired microcephaly (Decleration of head growth due to
significantly reduced brain weight).
Most children develop peculiar sighing respirations with intermittent
periods of apnea that may be associated with cyanosis -4 Breath
holding spells.
1341. Child while playing has sudden loss of
      consciousness and appears pale. There
      is no significant medical history and the
      child was otherwise healthy. Which of
      the following is the most probable
      diagnosis?
 a) Attention deficit hyperkinetic disorder

 b) Breath holding spell

 c) Autism

 d) Rett's syndrome



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Breath holding spell
Pallid form (Pallid spells)
These are initiated by painful experience, e.g falling and striking the
head.
Pallid spells are due to excessive central parasympethetic activity.
Clinical features include pallor, apnea, loss of consciousness,
hypotonia, seizures and bradycarda.
Treatment includes support and reassurance of parents. Atropine
may be used in refractory cases
1342. Infantile body proportion in adults is
      seen in all except-
a) Achondroplasia

b) Hypothyroidism

c) Klinefelter's syndrome

d) Cretinism



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Klinefelter's syndrome
Infantile type body porportion
Achondroplasia
Juvenile myxedema (hypothyroidism)
Cretinism
1343. If chronological age > skeletal age with
      normal growth velocity, then the final
      height that is expected to be achieved
      is
 a) Normal

 b) Less because of small bones

 c) More than expected

 d) Less because of epiphyseal closure due to accelerated growth
    velocity



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Normal
If the growth velocity is normal but the chronological age is more
than the bone age, then the diagnosis is Constitutional delay in
growth.
Constitutional delay in growth
It is the most common cause of short stature in mid childhood period
but the ultimate height is normal.
Their birth weight and height are normal. Strong family history of
parents having short stature in childhood with delay in onset of
puberty is usually present.
1344. Which of the following about hormone
      levels in a malnourished child is true?
a) Increased insulin levels

b) Decreased cortisol levels

c) Increased growth hormone

d) All of the above



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Increased growth hormone
changes in PEM
Decreased insulin levels
Increased cortisol
Increased growth hormone
  1345. A 9 month old child with respiratory
        rate 53/min and presence of cough is
        classified as :
   a) SIRS

   b) Respiratory distress

   c) Tachypnoea

   d) ARDS



   Correct Answer - C
   Answer- C. Tachypnoea
   Tachypnea (fast breathing) : Fast breathing is defined as:
1. less than 2 months of age -> 60 breaths per minute
2. Child aged 2 months upto 12 months - 50 breaths per minute
3. Child aged 12 months upto 5 years - 40 breaths per minute
1346. A newborn after prolonged labour is not
      breathing well and after 30 seconds of
      receiving 100% oxygen by bag and
      mask, heart rate is 88 beats per min,
      what is the next step in management?
a) Discontinue oxygen and ventilation

b) Discontinue oxygen, continue ventilation

c) Continue oxygen and ventilation

d) Start chest compressions



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Continue oxygen and ventilation
After the infant has received 30 seconds of ventilation with
100% oxygen by bag and mask, evaluation of heart rate should
be done -
HR >100 → Discontinue ventilation if spontaneous respiration is
present.
HR 60 to 100 → Continue ventilation
Below 60 → Continue ventilation + chest compressions
After 30 seconds of chest compressions, the heart rate is
checked.
HR < 60 → Continue chest compression and bag & mask ventilation
+ initiate medications.
HR > 60 → Discontinue chest compression but continue bag &
mask ventilation until the heart rate is above 100.
[Ref: O.P.Ghai 7th/e p. 98]
1347. How are chest compressions given in a
      newborn?
 a) Using palm on the lower third of sternum

 b) Using two fingers on the middle third of sternum

 c) Using the two thumbs on the lower third of sternum

 d) Using three fingers on the lower third of sternum



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Using the two thumbs on the lower third of sternum
Two - finger technique
The tips of the middle finger and either the index finger or ring finger
of one hand are used to compress the sternum.
The other hand is used to support the infant's back, unless the infant
is on a very firm surface.
1348. Contraindication of bag and mask
      ventilation are all of the following
      except:
      March 2009
 a) Tracheo-esophageal fistula

 b) Hiatus hernia

 c) Pregnancy

 d) Empty stomach



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D: Empty Stomach
        Bag-mask ventilation can produce gastric inflation with
  complications, including regurgitation, aspiration, and pneumonia.
Conditions predisposing to aspiration are:
Full stomach patients
Hiatus hernia, pregnancy
Intestinal obstruction
Tracheo-esophageal fistula
Meconium aspiration syndrome
 Gastric inflation can elevate the diaphragm, restrict lung movement,
              and decrease respiratory system compliance
1349. Grasp reflex develops by -
 a) 20 weeks

 b) 24 weeks

 c) 28 weeks

 d) 32 weeks



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., 28 weeks
Reflex- Age of appearance 32 - Age of disappearance (after birth)
1350. Asymmetric tonic neck reflex
      disappears at what age?
 a) 2 months

 b) 3 months

 c) 6 months

 d) 8 months



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. 6 months
Assymmetic tonic neck- wks of gestation 4-6 → 6-7 months
1351. True about tonic neck reflex is
 a) Extension of arm on ipsilateral side, flexion on contralateral side

 b) Extension of arm on contralateral side, flexion on ipsilateral side

 c) Extension of arms on both sides

 d) Flexion of arms on both sides



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Extension of arm on ipsilateral side, flexion on
contralateral side
The tonic neck reflex is produced by manually rotating the infant's
head to 1 side and observing for the characteristic fencing posture
(extension of the arm on the side to which the face is rotated and
flexion of the contralateral arm).
An obligatory tonic neck response, in which the infant becomes
"stuck" in the fencing posture, is always abnormal and implies a
CNS disorder.
1352. Withdrawal reflex is an example of which of the following?
 a) Monosynaptic reflex

 b) Polysynaptic reflex

 c) Both A and B of the above

 d) None of the above



Correct Answer - B
The withdrawal reflex is a typical polysynaptic reflex that occurs in
response to a usually painful stimulation of the skin or subcutaneous
tissues and muscle.
When a reflex arc consists of only two neurons in an animal (one
sensory neuron, and one motor neuron), it is defined as
monosynaptic. Monosynaptic refers to the presence of a single
chemical synapse. In the case of peripheral muscle reflexes (patellar
reflex, achilles reflex), brief stimulation to the muscle spindle results
in contraction of the agonist or effector muscle.
In polysynaptic reflex pathways, one or more interneurons connect
afferent (sensory) and efferent (motor) signals. All but the most
simple reflexes are polysynaptic, allowing processing or inhibition of
polysynaptic reflexes within the brain.

Ref: Ganong's Review of Medical Physiology 23rd edition, Chapter
9.
1353. Closure of patent ductus arteriosus is
      stimulated by?
 a) Prostaglandin F2a

 b) Cycloxygenase

 c) Increase in 02 tension at birth

 d) Hypercarbia



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Increase in 02 tension at birth
The mechanism producing the initial constriction of ductus arteriosus
is not completely understood, but the increase in arterial 02 tension
plays an important role.
One more factor which helps in closure of the ductus arteriosus is
the decrease in concentration of prostaglandins at the time of birth.
1354. False about PDA is
 a) More common in females

 b) Anatomical closure takes 21 hours after birth

 c) PGE maintains patency of ductus

 d) Dilatation of ascending aorta



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Anatomical closure takes 21 hours after birth
Patent ductus arteriosus is a communication between the pulmonary
artery and aorta.
'Functional closure' takes place within 15 hours of birth. 'Anatomic
closure' of ductus arteriosus occurs 10-21 days after birth.
Prostaglandins maintain the patency of ductus.
The persistence of function of ductus arteriosus beyond 24 hours
after birth is considered as PDA in term neonate, i.e. if functional
closure does not take place in 24 hours after birth, it is considered
as PDA.
1355. Which of the following is not seen in
      patent ductus arteriosus?
 a) Left atrial hypertrophy

 b) Left ventricular enlargement

 c) Continuous murmur

 d) Attenuated SI



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Attenuated SI
Increased flow after passing through lung reaches the left atrium and
causes volume overload → Left atrial dilatation and hypertrophy.
Increased blood volume passes from left atrium to left ventricle
through mitral valve, i.e., increased flow through mitral
valve → Accentuation of S1 and delayed diastolic murmur.
Left ventricle receives larger amount of blood that results in volume
overload → Left ventricle enlargement.
1356. Which of the following congenital
      anomalies leads to heart failure at
      birth?
 a) Total anomalous pulmonary venous connection

 b) Transposition of great arteries

 c) Pulmonary atresia

 d) Coarctation of aorta



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Pulmonary atresia
Timing of CHF in congenital heart diseases- Pulmonary, mitral and
aortic atresias
Hypoplastic left and right heart syndromes, transposition and
malposition of great ate ries.
1357. The following features are true for
      tetralogy of Fallot, except -
 a) Ventricular septal defect

 b) Right ventricular hypertrophy

 c) Atrial septal defect

 d) Pulmonary stenosis



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., ASD
Tetralogy of Fallot
* The classical example of cyanotic patients with pulmonic stenosis
is tetralogy of fallot.
* TOF is the commonest congenital heart disease.
* Constituents of TOF
Ventricular septal defect           Overriding or dextroposed aorta
Pulmonic stenosis                 Right ventricular hypertrophy.
   1358. Most important prognostic marker of
         tetralogy of fallot
    a) VSD

    b) Pulmonary stenosis

    c) Overriding of aorta

    d) Right ventricular hypertrophy



   Correct Answer - B
   Answer- B. Pulmonary stenosis
   Tetrology of fallot has 4 components:
1. Obstruction to right ventricular outflow (pulmonary stenosis),
2. A mal-alignment type of ventricular septa] defect (VSD),
3. Dextro position of the aorta so that it overrides the ventricular
   septum, and
4. Right ventricular hypertrophy
   [Ref Nelson 20th le p. 2211]
1359. Microcephaly is common in children of
      mothers with all except
 a) Alcohol intake

 b) Warfarin intake

 c) Warfarin intake

 d) Varicella



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Warfarin intake
Secondary
Structural defects : Neural tube defects (anencephaly,
encephalocele).
Metabolic disorders : Rhenylketonuria, citrullinemia, methylmalonic
aciduria.
Congenital infections : Rubella, CMV, HSV, toxoplasmosis, syphilis,
varicella.
Teratogens : Alcohol, tobacco, cocaine, heroin.
Others : Maternal diabetes, maternal phenylketonuria,
hypothyroidism, hypopituitrism, adrenal insufficiency.
1360. Which of the following statement is true for physiological jaundice in
      neonate?

 a) Occurs in the first 6 hours of delivery

 b) Neurological sequelae are common

 c) Best treated by phototherapy

 d) Starts on 2nd day of life



Correct Answer - D
Most neonates develop visible jaundice due to elevation of
unconjugated bilirubin concentration during their first week.
This common condition is called Physiological jaundice.
It lasts for 5 days in term infants & 7 days in preterm infants.
It doesnot require any treatment & disappers spontaneously. In
pathological jaundice clinical jaundice will appear in the first 24hrs of
life.
Ref: Nelson, 18th Edition, Pages 760-761; O P Ghai, 6th Edition,
Pages 170-171.
1361. What is the capacity of stomach at
      birth
 a) 5 ml

 b) 25 ml

 c) 50 ml

 d) 100 ml



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. 50 ml
Day 1 5 - 7 ml. Size of cherry
Day 3 22 - 27 ml. Size of walnut
One week 45 - 60 ml. Size of an apricot
One month 80 - 150 ml. Size of a large egg
1362. Colour of stools in breastfed new born
      is -
 a) Red

 b) Green

 c) Black

 d) Golden



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Golden
Colour of stools in neonate
Meconium (first stool) is passed within 24 hours. After that
meconium stools (black tarry) can be passed upto 3 days.
On 4th-5th days transitional stools (greenish) are passed. After 5
days regular milk stools (golden yellow) are passed.
There is golden discoloration of stool.
1363. Trigonocephaly is due to premature
      closure of which suture?
 a) Sagittal suture

 b) Metopic suture

 c) Lambdoid suture

 d) Coronal suture



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Metopic suture
Trigonocephal- Metopic suture
Keel shaped forehead
Hypotelorism
Abnormalities of forebrain
1364. Which of the following is a marker for neural tube defects?
 a) ↑Phosphatidylesterase

 b) ↑Pseudocholinesterase

 c) ↑Acetylcholinesterase

 d) ↑Butyrylcholinesterase



Correct Answer - C
Neural tube defects are associated with high levels of
Acetylcholinesterase.

Ref: Genetic disorders and Fetus, 4th Edition, Page 673; Ian
Donald's Practical Obstetric Problem By Renu Misra, 6th Edition,
Page 44
* In intra embryonic life, neural tube is open at both end and freely
communicate with amniotic cavity. Failure of closure of neural tube
results in persistent of this communication. This allows excretion of
following fetal substances into amniotic cavity ?
  - Alpha - fetoprotein
  - Acetylcholinesterase
* These serve as biochemical markers for NTDs for prenatal
diagnosis.
1365. Meconium ileus is associated with:
 a) Cystic fibrosis

 b) Infant of diabetic mother

 c) Hypothyroidism

 d) None of the above



Correct Answer - A
Infants with cystic fibrosis have characteristic pancreatic enzyme
deficiencies and abnormal chloride secretion in the intestine that
result in the production of viscous, water-poor meconium.

Meconium ileus occurs when this thick, highly viscous meconium
becomes impacted in the ileum and leads to high-grade intestinal
obstruction.

Ref: Schwartz’s principle of surgery 9th edition, chapter 39.
1366. RDA of zinc in a child ?
a) 10 mg

b) 20 mg

c) 6-8 mg

d) 4-5 mg



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., 6-8 mg
RDA of Zinc in children
1 - 3 years              —> 3mg
4 - 8 years              -5 5 mg
9 years and above (male) —> 8 - 11 mg
9 years and above (female) --> 8 mg
1367. Which of the following is not a feature
      of Minimal change disease?
 a) Hypertension

 b) Edema

 c) Proteinuria

 d) Responsive to steroid therapy



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Hypertension
Minimal Change Disease is the most common cause of Nephrotic
syndrome in children.
Edema and Selective proteinuria are features of nephrotic
syndrome. Fever may be present on account of increased
susceptibility to infection.
Minimal change disease prsents with insidious onset of nephrotic
syndrome in children below 6 years of age.
Hypertension is not a feature of nephrotic syndrome and is rare in
Minimal change disease.
Hematuria (a finding of nephritic syndrome) is also rare.
1368. Which of the following drugs is useful in the prophylaxis of migraine?
 a) Propranolol

 b) Sumatriptan

 c) Domperidone

 d) Ergotamine



Correct Answer - A
Drugs such as topiramate, valproate, propanolol, timolol, candesartan, verapamil and
amitryptilline are indicated in migraine prophylaxis.

Migraine prophylaxis is indicated when migraine headaches occur more than two or three
times a month or when it is associated with significant disability. After initiation of therapy,it
should be continued for several months. Once the patient remains headache free, the dose
is tapered and the drug is eventually withdrawn. Botulinum toxin type A was approved by
the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for migraine prevention in late 2010.

Ref: Current Medical Diagnosis and treatment 2012, Chapter 24
1369. Drug of choice for infantile spasm is?
 a) Vigabatrin

 b) Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH)

 c) Ethosuximide

 d) Carbamazepine



Correct Answer - A
Ans. 'a' i.e., Vigabatrin
Vigabatrin (drug of choice), ACTH (2nd choice) and
corticosteroids are used for treatment.
1370. What is the rate of CSF formation in
      children?
 a) 0.3 ml/min

 b) 1 ml/min

 c) 3 ml/min

 d) 20 ml/min



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. 0.3 ml/min
The rate of CSF formation in children and adults is :-
0.3 to 0.4 ml/min OR
18 to 20 ml/hour
1371. Most common cause of cranial
      irradiation in children is
 a) Small cell lung Ca

 b) ALL

 c) AML

 d) Craniopharyngioma



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. ALL
ALL and small cell lung Ca are two major indications for cranial
irradiation, even prophylactically to prevent brain metastasis.
In children, ALL is the most common cause.
1372. Most common cause of severe
      hematemesis in a child is-
 a) Portal hypetension

 b) Peptic ulcer

 c) Mallory weiss syndrome

 d) None of the above



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Portal hypertension
"Massive hematemesis in a child is almost always due to variceal
bleeding".
Variceal bleeding is due to portal hypertension.
  1373. Which of the following is not a feature
        of physiological anaemia of infancy?
    a) Term infant hemoglobin 7 gm%

    b) Preterm infant hemoglobin 7 gm%

    c) Term infant hemoglobin 9 gm%

    d) Preterm infant hemoglobin 9 gm%



   Correct Answer - A
   Answer- A. Term infant hemoglobin 7 gm%
   Physiologic Anemia of Infancy
1. Hemoglobin drops to low point at age 6 to 8 weeks
2. Erythropoietin nadir drops Hemoglobin
3. Term Infants: Hemoglobin drops to 9-11 g/dl
4. Preterm Infants: Hemoglobin drops to 7-9 g/dl
   [Ref Anemia in infancy, pediatric in review American academy of
   pediatrics 2012]
1374. Mean hemoglobin in a 1 year old child
      is
a) 18.5 g/dl

b) 16.5 g/d1

c) 14 g/c11

d) 12 g/dl



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. 12 g/dl
          Hb level
                      Prevalence (%)
          (g/L)
Age                   Mild anemia      Moderate to Severe
       N Meam SE
(mo)                  (Hb<110 g/L)     anemia (Hb<80 g/L)
0-5    56 9.8    0.21 78.1             5.2
6-11 88 10.08 0.17 75.3                5.8
12-23 128 10.04 0.21 63.3              11.9
24-60 251 10.18 0.13 68.3              8.1
Totel 523 10.09 0.09 69.3              8.3
Hb, hemoglobin
a. Means and frequencies are weighted.
1375. Which of the following biochemical test is used to diagnose Dubin
      Johnson syndrome?

 a) Serum transaminases

 b) Bromsulphalein test (BSP)

 c) Hippurate test

 d) Gamma glutamyl transferase level



Correct Answer - B
Bromsulphalein test (BSP) is the diagnostic test for Dubin-Johnson Syndrome. Biliary
excretion of numerous anionic compounds such as Bromsulphalein (BSP) is compromised
in Dubin-Johnson Syndrome (DJS). In this test, BSP is administered as IV bolus and its
clearance from plasma is determined. BSP levels show a characteristic rise in patients with
DJS after 90 minutes of injection, due to reflux of conjugated BSP into the circulation from
the hepatocyte.
Ref: Davidson’s principles and practice of Medicine, 20th Edition, Chapter 23, Page
945; Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 16th Edition, Page 1821; Digestive
Diseases and Sciences Vol/17 numbers 6.
1376. Albinism is due to deficiency of the following enzyme?
 a) Phenylalanine hydroxylase

 b) Homogentisic acid oxidase

 c) Tyrosinase

 d) Decarboxylase



Correct Answer - C
The most common cause of albinism is a defect in tyrosinase, the enzyme most responsible
for the synthesis of melanin. Albinism is an inborn error due to lack of synthesis of melanin.
It is an autosomal recessive disorder with a frequency of 1 in 20,000.

Ref: Textbook of Biochemistry and Human Biology by G. P. Talwar, 3rd Ed, Page 452
1377. Amino acid metabolism is implicated in
      which disease?
 a) Maple syrup urine disease

 b) Reye's syndrome

 c) Von Gierke's disease

 d) McArdle's disease



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Maple syrup urine disease
It is due to deficiency of enzyme that catalyzes the second reaction
in these amino acids metabolism i.e. branched chain-a keto acid
dehydrogenase which catalyses decarboxylation of branched chain
amino acids.
1378. A 3 months old child was started on
      supplemental foods alongwith
      breastmilk. The child was fed with fruit
      pulp and sweetened cereals. Soon the
      child developed bloating of abdomen,
      vomiting, lethargy, irritability. On
      investigation, there was
      hyperbilirunemia and elevated
      transaminase levels. The child is
      suffering from which of the following
      enzyme deficiencies?
 a) Fructokinase

 b) Aldolase B

 c) Gal actokinase

 d) Galactose - 1 - phosphate uridyl transferase



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Aldolase B
Symptoms occur when foods or formulas containing these sugars
are introduced into the diet.
Clinical manifestations resemble galactosemia and include jaundice,
hepatomegaly, vomiting, lethargy, irritability, and convulsions.
Laboratory findings include a prolonged clotting time, hypo-
albuminemia, elevation of bilirubin and transaminase levels, and
proximal tubular dysfunction.
1379. Earliest symptom of Tay sach disease
 a) Exaggerated startle response

 b) Bone deformation

 c) Hepatomegaly

 d) Excessive bleeding



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Exaggerated startle response [Ref Illustrated
medical biochemistry p. 330]
Tay-Sach disease
Clinical symptoms are usually evident in the first year of life
Initial signs are not dramatic and present as enfeeblement, spasticity
and slow development.
An exaggerated startle response to sound may be the most
significant early sign of which a parent is aware.
Other features are mental retardation, deterioration of vision and
early death.
"Affected infants usually develop normally until 4-5 months of age
when decreased eye contact and an exaggerated startle response to
noise (hyperacusis) are noted." ---Nelson.
Patients with the infantile form of Tay-Sachs disease have clinical
manifestations in infancy including loss of motor skills, increased
startle reaction, and macular pallor and retinal cherry-red spots.
1380. All are true about sacrococcygeal
      teratoma except
 a) Not associated with increased serum markers

 b) In most cases is not visible externally

 c) If associated with hydrops, should be resected antenatally

 d) Most common tumor of fetus



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. In most cases is not visible externally
Ureters may be partially obstructed resulting in hydro-ureter and
hydronephrosis.
Sacrococcygeal Teratoma (SCT) is the most common neoplasm in
the fetus and newborn
Most common tumor in fetus and neonate sacrococcygeal teratoma
Most common tumor in infancy neuroblastoma.
They are not associated with elevated markers unless malignancy is
present.
Sacrococcygeal teratoma with hydrops :- Treatment - Inutero
resection or catheter directed vessel obliteration
1381. Most common sign of LRTI [Lower
      respiratory tract infection] in children
      is
 a) Chest indrawing

 b) Tachypnea

 c) Nasal flaring

 d) Failure to feed well



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Tachypnea
Tachypnea is the most consistent manifestation of pneumonia.
Pneumonia is an inflammation of the parenchyma of lungs, and
mostly caused by bacterial or viral infection.
Most common cause of paediatric pneumonia is respiratory syncytial
virus (RSV). Other viruses causing pneumonia are influenza virus
(2"° most common virus), adenovirus, rhinovirus, and parainfluenza
virus.
1382. Most common intra abdominal solid
      organ tumor in child is ?
 a) Neuroblastoma

 b) Rhabdomyoblastoma

 c) Wilm's tumor

 d) Hypernephroma



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Neuro blastoma
Most common abdominal cancer of childhood.
Most common cancer of infancy.
Most common extracranial solid tumor of childhood (most common
solid tumor of childhood is brain tumor).
1383. Which of the following is not a sign of
      severe dehydration?
 a) Tachycardia

 b) Anuria

 c) Increased thirst

 d) Delayed capillary refill [>3 sec]



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Increased thirst
Peripheral pulses either rapid and
weak or absent
Decreased blood pressure
No urine output
Very sunken eyes and fontanel
No tears
Parched mucous membrane
Delayed elasticity (poor skin turgor)
Very delayed capillary refill (> 3 sec)
Cold and mottled
Limp
Depressed consciousness
1384. What is the grade of dehydration if a
      child demonstrates excessive thirst and
      decreased urine output?
a) No dehydration

b) Mild dehydration

c) Moderate dehydration

d) Severe dehydration



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Mild dehydration
Normal or increased pulse
Decreased urine output
Thirsty
Normal physical findings
  1385. Content of Na' in ringer lactate is meq/1-
   a) 154

   b) 12

   c) 130

   d) 144



   Correct Answer - C
   Ans. is 'c' i.e., 130
1. 5% Dextrose / 10% Dx       Nil
2. N/2 saline              77 meq
3. N/5 saline               30 meq
4. 3% salime               513 meq
5. Ringer lactate           130 meq
6. Isolyte P.               26 meq
1386. Which of the following cannot be used
      to detect HIV status in early infancy?
 a) DNA - PCR

 b) HIV culture

 c) ELISA

 d) P - 24 antigen assay



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. ELISA
ELISA or Western blot test are not as reliable in young infants.
In older infants (> 6 months), detection of anti-HIV IgA antibodies by
ELISA is diagnostic.
In children (> 18 months) demonstration of anti-HIV IgG antibodies
by ELISA is used.
1387. Teratology is a study of
 a) Congenital heart defect

 b) Congenital abnormalities

 c) Wounds and injuries

 d) None of the above



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Congenital abnormalities
Study of Congenital heart defects is a part of the broad spectrum of
congenital abnormalities, the study of which is known as Teratology
1388. Russell silver syndrome is associated
      with which of the following?
 a) Autosomal inheritance

 b) X - linked inheritance

 c) Sporadic gene mutation

 d) Uniparental disomy



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Uniparental disomy
Angelman syndrome
Prader Willi syndrome
Pseudohypoparathyroidism Ib
Transient neonatal diabetes mellitus
Beckwith - Wiedemann syndrome
Russell silver syndrome
Wang syndrome
Temple syndrome
1389. Which of the following is not a feature
      of Down's syndrome?
 a) Hypotonia

 b) Infections

 c) Female infertility

 d) Early onset Alzheimer's disease



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Female infertility
GIT :- Anal atresia, Duodenal atresia, Hirschsprung disease, annular
pancreas.
Increased incidence of leukemia (1%). Leukemias common are ALL
(most common), AML (M7-AML) transient myeloproliferative
disorders, and Juvenil CML.
Others : Early onset of Alzheimer's disease, Decreased immunity
with recurrent infections, obesity, DM, Hypothyroidism (most
common endocrine abnormality).
1390. Which of the following is not a feature
      of Turner's syndrome?
 a) Cubitus valgus

 b) Cryptorchidism

 c) Short fourth metacarpal

 d) Shield chest



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Cryptorchidism
Clinical features in adolescents are short stature, webbed neck, low
posterior hair line, widely spaced nipples with broad chest (shield
chest), hypertelorism, epicanthus, slanted palpebral fissure, ptosis,
micrognathia, cubitus valgus (increared carrying angle),
sensorineural hearing loss, short fourth metacarpal, hypothyroidism,
streak ovaries, and sexual infantilism. Turner syndrome is the most
important cause of primary amenorrhea.
1391. In Turner's syndrome which of the
      following is NOT seen :
 a) Short stature

 b) Widely spaced nipple

 c) Webbed neck

 d) Mental retardation



Correct Answer - D
Answer is D (Mental retardation):
Mental retardation is seen in Down & Klinefelter's syndrome but not
in Turner's syndrome. All other features mentioned as options may
be seen in Turner's syndrome.
1392. Which of the following is true regarding
      Turner's syndrome?
 a) Cubitus valgus

 b) Autosomal dominant

 c) Monosomy of chromosome 12

 d) Sensorineural hearing loss



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Cubitus valgus
Turner syndrome is a monosomy of sex chromosome (not
autosomal dominant). Cubitus valgus is a feature of Turner
syndrome. SNHL is not a feature.
  1393. Single gene disorder which does not
        follow mendelian inheritance -
    a) Sickle cell anemia

    b) Down syndrome

    c) Fragile X-syndrome

    d) Retinoblastoma



   Correct Answer - C
   Ans. is 'c' i.e., Fragile X-Synd.
   Transmission of certain single-gene disorders does not follow
   classical mendelian principles.
   This group of disorder can be classified into following
   categories ?
1. Diseases caused by triplet - repeat mutation, e.g. fragile - X
   syndrome, Huntington disease, & others.
2. Disorders caused by mutation in mitochondrial genes, e.g. laber
   heriditary optic neuropathy.
3. Disorder associated with genomic imprinting.
4. Disorders associated with gonadal mosaicism.
1394. Most common cause of shock in child
 a) Septic shock

 b) Hypovolemic shock

 c) Cardiogenic shock

 d) Anaphylactic shock



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Hypovolemic shock
Hypovolemia is the most common cause of shock in children.
The 2nd most common cause - Septic or distributive shock .
3rd most common - Cardiogenic shock
1395. Which is the prognostic scoring system
      for head injury in children?
 a) CCS

 b) AUDIT

 c) Injury severity score

 d) Pediatric Trauma Score



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. CCS
     Table 1: Children Coma Score (CC S) < 2 years"
Ocular Response
4                 Pursuit
3                 Extra ocular muscles intact reactive pupils
2                 Fixed pupils and EOM impaired
1                 Fixed pupils and EOM paralyzed
Verbal response
3                 Cries
2                 Spontaneous respiration
1                 Apneic
Motor responses
4                 Flexes and extends
3                 Withdraws from painful stimuli
2                 Hypertonic
1                 Flaccid
Total Max. Score 11
Total Min Score
1396. Which of the following is a criteria for
      clinical Stage II of AIDS in children?
 a) Lymphadenopathy

 b) Oral candidiasis

 c) Hepatosplenomegaly

 d) Oesophageal candidiasis



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Hepatosplenomegaly
Clinical Stage 2
Hepatosplenomegaly
Papular pruritic eruptions
Seborrhoeic dermatitis
Extensive human papilloma virus infection
Extensive molluscum contagiosum
Fungal nail infections
Recurrent oral ulcerations
Lineal gingival erythema (LGE)
Angular cheilitis
Parotid enlargement
Herpes zoster
1397. Which of the following is closed at
      birth?
 a) Foramen ovale

 b) Posterior fontanelle

 c) Ductus venosus

 d) Anterior fontanelle



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Posterior fontanelle
Posterior fontanelle
Posterior fontanelle generally closes by 2-4 months after birth.
Posterior fontanelle usually closes by the age of 1-4 months. But
sometime it may be ossified (closes) at birth. Thus, it is the best
answer among the given choices.
1398. Harlequin skin change is seen due to
      mutation of which gene?
 a) ABCA 12

 b) FAD

 c) Keratin 1

 d) ALOXE 3



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. ABCA 12
Harlequin ichthyosis (HI) is caused by mutations in the ABCAl2
gene.
Mutation in the gene leads to defective lipid transport and ABCAl2
activity is required for the generation of long-chain ceramides that
are essential for the development of the normal skin barrier. It is
inherited by autosomal recessive mode of inheritance.
1399. Ritter disease is a disease caused by -
 a) Infection

 b) Autoimmune

 c) Genetic

 d) Metabolic disorder



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Infection
Staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome is caused predominantly by
phage group 2 staphylococci, particularly strains 71 and 55, which
are present at localized sites of infection.
1400. Pink color in the IMNCI chart is
      suggestive of
a) Normal zone of weight for age

b) Undernutrition (Upto - 2SD)

c) Severely underweight zone (Upto - 3SD)

d) Very severely undernourished (Upto - 5SD)



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Severely underweight zone (Upto - 3SD)
Green - Normal zone of weight for age
Yellow - Undernutrition (upto - 2SD)
Pink - Severely underweight zone (upto - 3 SD)
1401. 5DHT is necessary for development of
      which of the following?
 a) External genitalia

 b) Internal genitalia

 c) Mullerian structures

 d) Wollfian structures



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. External genitalia
Virilization of the wolffian duct is caused by the action of
testosterone itself.
Masculinization of the urogenital sinus and external genitals
depends on the action of DHT (Dehydrotestosterone) during the
critical period of fetal masculinization.
1402. True about Asperger syndrome:
 a) More common in girl

 b) Repetitive activity pattern

 c) Subnormal intelligence is consistent feature

 d) Severe language impairments is characteristic

 e) All



Correct Answer - B
Ans. b. Repetitive activity pattern
Asperger syndrome:
It is four times more likely to occur in males than in females and
usually is first diagnosed in children between the ages of 2 and 6.
The common characteristics include average or above average
intelligence"
There is no clinically significant general delay in spoken or receptive
language or cognitive development. Self' help skills, adaptive
behaviour, and curiosity about the environment during the first 3
years should be at a level consistent with normal intellectual
development
1403. Definition of childhood is under what
      age?
 a) 8 years

 b) 10 years

 c) 12 years

 d) 16 years



Correct Answer - C
12 years REF: Nelson Textbook of Paediatrics 17th edition different
pages
Infancy                                   0-1 yr
Toddlerhood                               1-3 yr
Early childhood (toddlerhood and some
                                          1-4 yr
time afterwards)
Middle Childhood (School Age)             6-12 yr
Preschool                                 2-5 yr
Adolescence (onset of puberty to
                                          12-20 yr
maturity)
Adulthood (full physical and intellectual 20-21 yr
maturity)                                 onwards
1404. Prevalence of omphalocele at birth is
 a) 1 in 100 live births

 b) 1 in 2000 live births

 c) 1 in 4000 live births

 d) 1 in 10,000 live births



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. 1 in 4000 live births
Incidence of omphalocele at 11 - 14 weeks gestation - 1 in 1100
pregnancies.
Prevalence at birth - 1 in 4000 - 6000 live births.
This indicates sudden mortality most likely due to in utero fetal
demise from associated chromosomal anomalies as well as elective
termination after the diagnosis
1405. Pectus excavatum is
 a) Protrusion of sternum

 b) Sternal depression

 c) Sternal cleft

 d) Lateral displacement of sternum



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Sternal depression
Pectus excavatum (funnel chest) is midline narrowing of thoracic
cavity due to sternal depression.
May occur in isolation or may be associated with a connective tissue
disorder, Marfan or Ehlers-Danlos syndrome. Secondary to chronic
lung disease, neuromuscular disease, or trauma.
1406. A child aged 7 years has how many
      teeth
 a) 15

 b) 20

 c) 26

 d) 32



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. 26
Permanent teeth that appear :
1st molars :- 4
Central incisors :- 2
Temporary teeth :- 20 (since molars are superadded permanent
teeth and central incisors are replaced).
So in all 26 teeth ( Range 24 to 26) - at 7 years of age.
1407. What is the age of the child who draws
      a circle and builds tower of 7 cubes?
a) 1 year

b) 2 years

c) 21/2 years

d) 3 years



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. 3 years
Age        Milestone               Age         Number of
                                               cubes of tower
12-24        Tries to scribble     12 months   2
             spontaneously                     3
             months
2 years      Draws a vertical or   15 months   4
             horizontal line
3 years      Draws a circle        18 months   6
4 years      Draws a cross (plus   21 months   7
             sign) and draws a     24 months
             rectangle
5 years      Draws a triangle      30 months   9
                                   36 months   10
1408. By what age is the milestone of
      climbing steps with alternate feet
      achieved?
 a) 2 years

 b) 3 years

 c) 4 years

 d) 5 years



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. 3 years
Walk independently- 1 year
unwell, climbing upstairs and going downstairs with one step at a
time- 2 years
Ride tricycle; climbing upstairs with alternate feet- 3 years
Hopping; going downstairs with alternate feet- 4 years
Skipping- 5 years
1409. Mature finger grip comes at what age?
a) 5 months

b) 7 months

c) 9 months

d) 1 year



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. 9 months
6 months → Drops one object when another is offered
7 months → Transfers object & unidextrous approach
9 months → -p Pincer grasp
12 — 13 months → Casting appear, mouthing disappear
15 months → Feeds himself with cup, slight spillage
1410. Social smile is attained at what age?
 a) 2 months

 b) 5 months

 c) 9 months

 d) 1 year



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. 2 months
Social smile develops at 2 months.
1411. Arrange the following milestones in the
      correct order of their attainment
      I.     Build tower of 4 cubes
      II.    Make simple sentences
      III.   Drawing a circle
      IV.    Drawing a rectangle
 a) II → III → IV → I

 b) I → II → III → IV

 c) II → I → III → IV

 d) I → II → IV → III



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. I → II → III → IV
The age of attainment of the milestones is :-
Builds a tower of 4 cubes →18 months
Makes simple sentences → 2 years
Drawing a circle → 3 years
Drawing a rectangle → 4 years
1412. By what age can a newborn recognize
      mother?
 a) 2 months

 b) 3 months

 c) 6 months

 d) 7 months



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. 3 months
Head control
Starts cooing
Recognizes mother
Can follow an object upto 180°
On pulling the child to sit, head lags partially (between 2-3 months).
After 3 months head control develops.
1413. Which of the following can be done by
      an 18 months old baby?
 a) Making tower of 9 cubes

 b) Can use 10 words with meaning

 c) Ride tricycle

 d) Turn pages of book one at a time



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Can use 10 words with meaning
At 18 months, the child can use 10 words with meaning.
1414. Vocabulary of 1.5 year old child is -
 a) 1-10 words

 b) 10-20 words

 c) 20-30 words

 d) 30-40 words



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., 10-20 words
At 18 months, the child can use 10 words with meaning.
Other milestones asked in the question are achieved in children
older than 18 months :?
Making a tower of 9 cubes - 30 months
Turn pages of book one at a time - 2 years
Ride tricycle - 3 years
1415. A child of 5 years can use sentences of
      around how many words?
 a) 6 words

 b) 10 words

 c) 100 words

 d) 250 words



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. 10 words
Although a child has a vocabulary of 250 words at 3 years, the child
can use sentence of 10 words at 5 years.
1416. Milestones achieved by a 10 months old
      child are all except -
 a) Pincer grasp

 b) Waving bye - bye

 c) Standing without support

 d) Plays a peek - a - boo game



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Standing without support
Baby stands without support by 1 year of age.
Pincer grasp → 9 months
Waving bye - bye → 9 months
Plays a peek - a - boo game → 10 months
1417. What is the age of a child who can
      identify 4 colours and draw a triangle?
 a) 21/2 years

 b) 3 years

 c) 4 years

 d) 5 years



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. 5 years
A child learns to draw a triangle at the age of 5 years.
Identification of four colours is attained at the age of 4 years.
1418. Weight of an infant doubles by what
      age?
 a) 6 months

 b) 1 year

 c) 2 years

 d) 3 years



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. 2 years
Weight of an infant doubles by 5 months and quadruples by 2 years
of age.
1419. Growth of head circumference in 1st 3
      months of life is by
 a) 2 cm

 b) 3 cm

 c) 5 cm

 d) 10 cm



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. 5 cm
Head circumference is measured from the occipital protuberance to
the supraorbital ridge of forehead which is the maximum occipito
frontal diameter of skull. The head circumference in utero grows by
0.5 cm in first 2 weeks, 0.75 cm in 3rd week and after that 1
cm/week till birth.
1420. Delayed eruption is failure of teeth to
      appear by
 a) 6 months

 b) 13 months

 c) 25 months

 d) 37 months



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. 13 months
Delayed eruption is usually considered when there are no teeth by
approximately 13 months of age (mean + 3 SD).
Common causes of delayed eruption of teeth include :-
Idiopathic (Most common).
Hypothyroid
Hypoparathyroid
Familial
  1421. Breast milk protects from infections as
        it contains all of the following except:
    a) IgE

    b) Lactoferrin

    c) Bifidus factor

    d) PABA



   Correct Answer - A
   Answer- A. IgE
   Breast milk contains several antiinfective factors
1. Antibodies -3 secretory IgA, IgM
2. Lysozyme
3. Antistaphylococcal factor
4. Specific inhibitory substances against viral infections.
5. Lactoferrin → Inhibits growth of E. coli.
6. Bile stimulated lipase → kills entamoeba histolytica and Giardia
   lamblia.
7. Bifidus factor → Inhibits growth of E. coli
8. Para-amino-benzoic acid (PABA) → Provides protection against
   malaria ix) Phagocytic macrophages and lymphoid cells
1422. Which of the following is true regarding
      premature milk as compared to mature
      milk?
 a) Less lactose

 b) Less iron

 c) Less immunoglobulins

 d) Less sodium



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Less lactose
Preterm milk
The milk of mother who delivers prematurely differs from the milk of
a mother who delivers at term.
Preterm milk contains : Less lactose (in comparison to term milk).
Contains more protein S, sodium, iron, immunoglobins and calories
as they are needed by the preterm baby.
1423. All of the following are true regarding
      breast milk as compared to cow's milk
      except
 a) Contains more lactose

 b) More amount of proteins

 c) Less amount of fat content

 d) Minerals and salts is less



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. More amount of proteins
In comparison to cow milk, human milk contains less amount of :
Proteins (1 gm/ 100 ml), salts (sodium, chloride, potassium), fat (3.4
gm/100 ml), and minerals (calcium, phosphate) & more : Lactose
(7g/100 ml or 7%).
1424. Which of the following is the best
      reference for growth monitoring in
      children?
 a) ICMR

 b) NCHS

 c) Boston

 d) IAP



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. NCHS
WHO reference values (NCHS standards)
These are most commonly used and best available reference values
for international use.
These values are based on the data assembled by United States
National Centre for Health Statistics (NCHS).
Classification of PEM is based on these standards
1425. Kwashiorkar is due to deficiency of
 a) Calories

 b) Minerals

 c) Vitamins

 d) Zinc



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Calories
Marasmus and kwashiorkor are due to deficiency of proteins and
calories.
It is characterized by classical 'triad' of edema (Due to
hypoalbuminemia), markedly retarded growth and psychomotor
(mental) changes.
1426.
Which of the following is the most
metabolically active part of long bone?
 a) Epiphysis

 b) Metaphysis

 c) Diaphysis

 d) Physis



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Physis
The growth plate (physis) and the adjacent terminal diaphysis
represent the most metabolically active segment of the long bone.
This part changes dramatically during development and hence it is
called the metaphysis
1427. Iliotibial band contracture in patients of
      poliomyelitis will lead to
 a) Flexion at hip and knee

 b) Flexion at hip, extention at knee

 c) Extention at hip flexion at knee

 d) Extention at hip and knee



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Flexion at hip and knee
Deformities: Iliotibial band contracture can lead to :
Flexion, abduction and external rotation deformity at hip (most
common).
Flexon and valgus at lcnee or sometimes triple deformity at knee
(flexion, posterior subluxation and external routation of tibia on
femur).
Equinovarus at ankle and foot.
Lumbar scoliosis and pelvic obliquity at spine and pelvis
respectively.
1428. Jumpers knee
 a) Apophysitis of patellar tendon as it inserts in patella

 b) Apophysitis of patellar tendon as it inserts in tibia

 c) Apophysitis of quadriceps tendon as it inserts in patella

 d) Apophysitis of hamstring tendon as it inserts in tibia



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Apophysitis of patellar tendon as it inserts in patella
It is also called Patellar tendinitis
This is an apophysitis (inflammation) of the patellar tendon as it
inserts into the patella.
It is associated with pain, swelling and crepitus.
1429. Which of the following is not true about
      Galeazzi fracture dislocation?
 a) Fracture of distal third of radius and dislocation of distal radio-
    ulnar joint

 b) Results from fall on outstretched hand

 c) The distal end of ulna dislocates volarly after disruption of distal
    radio - ulnar joint

 d) Radius is angulated medially and anteriorly



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. The distal end of ulna dislocates volarly after
disruption of distal radio - ulnar joint
Fracture of the distal third of the radius with dislocation of the distal
radioulnar joint
This injury is the counterpart of the Monteggia fracture-dislocation.
It commonly results from a fall on an out stretched hand.
The radius fracture is angulated medially and anteriorly. The distal
radioulnar joint is disrupted, resulting in dorsal dislocation of the
distal end of the ulna
Malunion occurs because of displacement of the fragment. It results
in deformity and limitation of supination and pronation.
1430. In Monteggia fracture, which is true
      about ulnar fracture and head of radius
 a) Both ulnar fracture and head of radius is displaced posteriorly

 b) Both ulnar fracture and head of radius is displaced anteriorly

 c) Ulnar fractures is posteriorly and head of radius is displaced
    anteriorly

 d) Ulnar fracture is anteriorly and head of radius is displaced
    posteriorly



Correct Answer - B
Ans: B i.e. Both ulnar fracture and head of radius is displaced
anteriorly
* This is a fracture of the upper-third of the ulna with dislocation of
the head of the radius. It is caused by a fall on an out​stretched hand.
It may also result from a direct blow on the back of the upper
forearm.
  - These fall into two main categories depending upon the
angulation of the ulna fracture - extension and flexion type. The
extension type, is the commoner of the two, where the ulna fracture
angulates anteriorly (extends) and the radial head dislocates
anteriorly. The flexion type is where the ulna fracture angulates
posteriorly (flexes) and the radial head dislocates posteriorly.
1431. Which of the following is not true about
      Jeffersons fracture?
 a) It is a burst fracture of the ring of atlas vertebra

 b) It is the most common type of atlas fracture

 c) Fracture definintion is particularly clear on CT Scan image

 d) It is associated with injury elsewhere in spine in 25% of the
    cases



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. It is associated with injury elsewhere in spine in
25% of the cases
Sudden severe load on the top of the head may cause a 'bursting'
force which fractures the ring of the atlas (Jefferson's fracture). Thus
it is a type of axial compression force.
It is the most common type of fracture of the Atlas.
There is no encroachment on the neural canal and usually no
neurological damage.
With the exception of pain or loss of sensation in the greater
occipital nerve distribution, neurological sequelae are uncommon
and more likely to be related to associated injuries.
Fracture of atlas are associated with injury elsewhere in cervical
spine in upto 50% of cases; odontoid fractures and hangman's
fracture in particular should be excluded
1432. Which of the following shoulder
      movements is/ are weak in patients of
      supraspinatus tear?
 a) Abduction

 b) Adduction

 c) External rotation

 d) Internal rotation



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Abduction
Patients may tear the supraspinatus tendon acutely by falling on an
outstretched arm or lifting a heavy object.
Symptoms are pain along with weakness of abduction and external
rotation of the shoulder.
Atrophy of the supraspinatus muscles develops.
1433. Which of the following is not true about
      impingement syndrome?
 a) It is the tendinitis caused by inflammation of the rotator cuff
    tendons

 b) Supraspinatus tendon is most often involved

 c) Shoulder abduction in the arc of 60 - 120 degrees is particularly
    painful

 d) Surgical decompression of the subacromial space is frequently
    indicated



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Surgical decompression of the subacromial space
is frequently indicated
Impingement syndrome (painful are syndrome) is most commonly
due tendinits of supraspinatus component of rotator cuff and is
characterized by pain in 60°- 120" of abduction. Treatment is initialy
conservative. Surgical decompression is required in failed cases.
1434. Vascular sign of Narath is noticed in
 a) Fracture neck of femur

 b) Perthes disease

 c) Posterior dislocation of hip

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - C
C i.e. Posterior dislocation of hip
Vascular sign of narath is positive in posterior dislocation of hip joint.
Due to posterior dislocation, the hip joint falls on the femoral artery,
and this causes feeble or absent femoral pulse.
   1435. Most dangerous type of odontoid
         fracture as per Anderson and D' Alonzo
         classification and its respective
         management is
    a) Type I - immobilization in rigid collar

    b) Type II - screw fixation

    c) Type III - halo vest immmobilization

    d) Type IV - ope reduction internal fixation



   Correct Answer - B
   Answer- B. Type II - screw fixation
   Odontoid fractures have been classified by Anderson and
   D'Alonzo (1974) as follows:
1. Type I - An avulsion fracture of the tip of the odontoid process due to
   traction by the alar ligaments. The fracture is stable (above the
   transverse ligament) and unites without difficulty.
2. Type II - A fracture at the junction of the odontoid process and the
   body of the axis. This is the most common (and potentially the most
   dangerous) type. The fracture is unstable and prone to non-union. It
   requires fixation by screw.
3. Type III - A fracture through the body of the axis. The fracture is
   stable and almost always unites with immobilization.
1436. Increased Q angle predisposes to
 a) Medial patellar subluxation

 b) Lateral patellar subluxation

 c) Superior patellar subluxation

 d) Inferior patellar subluxation



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Lateral patellar subluxation
Patellar alignment can be assessed by measuring the Q-angle
(quadriceps angle).
This is the angle subtended by a line drawn from the anterior
superior iliac spine to the centre of the patella and another from the
centre of the patella to the tibial tubercle.
It normally averages about 14 degrees in men and 17 degrees in
women.
Patellofemoral stability is maintained by a combination of the
articular surface geometry and soft tissue restraints.
1437. Seat belt injury is
 a) Tear drop fracture

 b) Wedge fracture

 c) Chance fracture

 d) Whiplash injury



Correct Answer - C
C i.e. Chance fracture
A horizontal fracture of the vertebra extending from body to the
posterior element, caused by a strong distraction force
1438. Palpable femur head on per rectal exam
      is a feature of which of the following
      conditions?
 a) Posterior hip dislocation

 b) Anterior hip dislocation

 c) Central hip dislocation

 d) Inferior hip dislocation



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Central hip dislocation
In central fracture-dislocation of the hip the femoral head is driven
through the floor (medial wall) of the acetabulum towards the pelvic
cavity.
It occurs due to fall on the side, or a blow over the greater trochater.
1439. The most common complication of
      intracapsular fracture neck of femur is
 a) Mal union

 b) Osteoarthritis

 c) Non-Union

 d) Shortening



Correct Answer - C
C i.e. Nonunion
Both intracapsular neck fracture and extracapsular fracture
(basicervical and IT fracture) have same deformities, i.e. external
rotation and shortening.
These displacements are more marked in extracapsular fractures,
because in an intracapsular fracture, the capsule of the hip joint is
attached to the distal fragment and prevents extreme rotation and
displacement of the distal fragment (and with it, the limb).
In extracapsular fracture, distal fragment being outside the capsule
is displaced more markedly.
1440. Popliteal artery injury is commonly
      seen in which type of traumatic knee
      dislocation?
 a) Anterior

 b) Posterior

 c) Medial

 d) Lateral



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Posterior
Popliteal artery injury is common with both anterior and posterior
dislocations.
Posterior dislocations more likely to result in direct injury and even
rupture of popliteal artery (isolated transection).
Anterior dislocations cause stretching of popliteal artery which may
lead to intimal disruption and thrombosis (damage is over a longer
segment of artery).
   1441. Kocher manoeuver is used for
    a) Shoulder reduction

    b) Elbow reduction

    c) Ankle dislocation

    d) Knee dislocation



   Correct Answer - A
   Answer- A. Shoulder reduction
   Kocher's manoeuvre :
   This is the most commonly used method.
   The steps are as follows:
1. Traction— with the elbow flexed to a right angle steady tractionis
   applied along the long axis of the humerus;
2. External rotation—the arm is rotated externally;
3. Adduction—the externally rotated arm is adducted by carrying the
   elbow across the body towards the midline; and
4. Internal rotation – the arm is rotated internally so that the hand falls
   across to the opposite shoulder.
1442. Ankle sprain due to forced inversion of
      a plantar flexed foot is due to injury to
 a) Anterior talofibular ligament

 b) Posterior talofibular ligament

 c) Calcaneofibular ligament

 d) Posterior fibres of deltoid



Correct Answer - A
Ans. a. Anterior talofibular ligament
* Structures damaged due to inversion injury.
  - Peroneal tendon injury.
  - Avulsion fracture of tip of lateral malleolus .
  - Avulsion fracture of anterolateral surface of talus & calcaneum
(sustentaculum tali).
  - Fracture of base of 5th metatarsal.
  - Lateral collateral ligament injury (anterior talo fibular
> calcaneofibular > posterior- talofibular ligament).
  - Medial malleolus fracture.
1443. Treatment of scaphoid fracture
 a) Conservative

 b) Compression Screws

 c) Compression Plating

 d) Traction



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Conservative
The treatment of a scaphoid is essentially conservative.
The hand is immobilized in a scaphoid cast with wrist in little
dorsiflexion and radial deviation (glass holding position).
1444. All of the following are true regarding
      fracture of lateral condyle of humerus
      except
 a) Usually seen at 6 - 10 years of age

 b) Results in Gun stock deformity

 c) Cubitus valgus occurs

 d) Tardy ulnar nerve palsy is seen



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Results in Gun stock deformity
Fracture Lateral Condyle Humerus/Jupiter fracture
It is a common fracture in children. The lateral condylar (or capitular)
epiphysis begins to ossify during the first year of life and fuses with
shaft at 12-16 years. Between these ages it may be sheared off or
avulsed by forceful traction. The maximum chances of injury is
between 6-10 years.
1445. Most common complication of fracture
      of tibia
 a) Infection

 b) Compartment syndrome

 c) Delayed union

 d) Vascular injury



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Delayed union
The tibia has some characteristic features which are responsible for
delayed union or non-union of tibia fractures.
The distal third of tibia is particularly prone for delayed union and
nonunion because of its precarious blood supply.
1446. Which of the following is not true about
      ACL injury?
 a) It is a component of the 0' Donoghue triad

 b) ACL is intrasynovial

 c) ACL is important for proprioceptive function

 d) Anterior drawer test is the most sensitive test



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Anterior drawer test is the most sensitive test
Lachman's test is the most sensitive test for anterior cruciate
ligament tears. It is done with the knee flexed at 20 degrees. So it
can be done in acute as well as chronic injuries. (because in acute
cases with hemarthrosis more flexion is usually not possible so
performing anterior drawer test is difficult).
ACL is intrasynovial & has proprioceptive function.
1447. Continuous fixed traction is provided
      by -
 a) Thomas splint

 b) BB splint

 c) Hamilton Russel

 d) Gallows



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Thomas splint
Combined traction - If a Thomas' splint is used, the tapes are tied to
the end of the splint and the entire splint is then suspended, as in
balanced traction
1448. Cobra head plate is used for
 a) Hip arthrodesis

 b) Knee arthrodesis

 c) Elbow arthrodesis

 d) Ankle arthrodesis



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Hip arthrodesis
Special implants
SP nail-plants
Dynamic hip screw (DHS)- Intertrochanteric fracture
Condylar blade-plate- Interochanteric fracture
T-plate- Condylar fracture of femur
Spoon plate tibia- Condyar fracture of tibia
Cobra plate- Fracture of lower aend of Hip arthrodesis
1449. Locking compression plating for is
      commonly indicated in the following
      fracture types
 a) Periarticular fractures

 b) Transverse or oblique fractures of long bones

 c) Intertrochanteric fractures

 d) Fracture of long bones



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Periarticular fractures
Locking compression plates are commonly used in periarticular
fractures
1450. Dunlop traction is a type of traction
      used in management of
 a) Fracture humerus

 b) Fracture radius

 c) Fracture femur

 d) Fracture Tibia



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Fracture humerus
It is used in management of fracture humerus.
It is a skin traction applied to the arm with the child supine.
Traction straps are applied to the forearm with the arm supinated.
A counterweight is hung from the upper part of the arm to help pull
the proximal fragment of the humerus posteriorly, to approximate the
distal fragment.
Longitudinal traction is then applied to the supinated forearm with
the elbow flexed to about 45 degrees
1451. Ankle reflex is affected in prolapsed
      intervertebral disc at what level?
 a) L3 - L4

 b) L4 - L5

 c) L5 - S1

 d) S1 - S2



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. L5-S1
S1 root- Weakness of plantar flexors of root- Over lateral side of foot
1452. CTEV shoe true is
 a) It is the same as normal shoe

 b) It has straight medial border

 c) It has medical shoe raise

 d) It has heel with extra length



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. It has straight medial border
It has straight inner (medial) border which helps prevent forefoot
adduction.
It has outer shoe raise which helps prevent forefoot inversion.
There is no heel which helps prevent equinus.
1453. All are features of inflammatory arthritis
      except?
 a) Morning stiffness

 b) X-ray showing sclerosis

 c) Elevated ESR

 d) Weight gain



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. X-ray showing sclerosis
X-ray feature of inflammatory arthritis shows rarefaction while x-ray
features in non-inflammatory arthritis reveals sclerosis.
1454. Which of the following is not true about
      the tests for hip instability in neonates?
 a) Ortolanis test has two parts

 b) They are performed at 2 - 3 days of birth

 c) In ortolanis test examiners fingers rest on the greater trochanter

 d) In barlows test examiners thumb is placed in the groin



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Ortolanis test has two parts
In Ortolani's test, the baby's thighs are held with the thumbs medially
and the fingers resting on the greater trochanters; the hips are flexed
to 90 degrees and gently abducted. Normally there is smooth
abduction to almost 90 degrees.
In congenital dislocation the movement is usually impeded, but if
pressure is applied to the greater trochanter there is a soft 'clunk' as
the dislocation reduces, and then the hip abducts fully (the 'jerk of
entry').
If abduction stops halfway and there is no jerk of entry, there may be
an irreducible dislocation.
   1455. Ortolani test is positive when the
         examiner hears the ?
    a) Clunk of entry on abduction and flexion of hip

    b) Clunk of entry on extension and adduction of hip

    c) Click of exit on abduction and flexion of hip

    d) Click of exit on extension and adduction of hip



   Correct Answer - A
   Ans. is 'a' i.e., Clunk of entry on abduction and flexion of hip
   Clinical tests for CDH/DDH
   In infancy two tests are used.
   Barlow's test
   This test is done within 2-3 days of birth.
   The test has two parts :?
1. Part 1 :- Infant is in supine position with hip and knee in 90° of
   flexion, The hip is slowly adducted & pushed to dislocate the hip and
   one can hear a clunck of exit of femoral head out of the acetabulum.
2. Part 2 :- Now the hip is gentely abducted and pulled to reduce the
   hip. This will cause 'clunk' indicating reduction of hip.
   It is quite obvious that part 1 can be done only dislocatable hip; but
   not in already dislocated hip as the head is already out of the
   acetabulum.
   Ortolani's test
   This test is similar to 2nd part of Barlow's test, i.e. slow abduction of
   hip in flexed position of hip & knee to reduce the hip.
1456. Oncogenic osteomalacia is mediated by
 a) Phosphatonin

 b) Calcitonin

 c) Interleukin 2

 d) Interleukin 6



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Phosphatonin
Oncogenic osteomalacia is mediated by phosphatonin in certain
tumors, particularly vascular tumours like hemangiopericytomas and
also fibrohistocytic lesions
1457. Which of the following is true about
      CTEV
 a) It is more common in females

 b) Right foot is usually more affected than the left

 c) Talus is displaced medial and plantarwards

 d) Tibia usually shows lateral torsion



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Talus is displaced medial and plantarwards
CTEV is the commonest and most important congenital deformity of
the foot. CTEV is more common males in than in females (males to
female ratio 2.5 : 1). In half of the cases CTEV is bilateral. Right and
left foot are affected equally.
1458. The last deformity to be corrected by
      Ponseti's method for CTEV is -
 a) Heel Varus

 b) Equinus

 c) Foot Adduction

 d) Cavus



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Equinus
Ponseti's technique
This involves first correcting the cavus deformiry then the
adductionand heel varus andfinally the equinus deformity.
This technique is now mostly accepted technique for CTEV
correction as it is based on better understanding ofthe
pathoanatomy ofthe deformed foot.
The success ofreduction is 90-98 Percent.
1459. Which of the following is not true about
      the manipulation methods to correct
      CTEV?
 a) Involves serial casting and below knee plaster casting

 b) In kites method deformities are corrected sequentially
    adduction → inversion → equinus

 c) Ponseti's technique has success rate of 90 - 98%

 d) Ponseti's method of correction involves cavus —> adduction -->
    heel varus —> equinus



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Involves serial casting and below knee plaster
casting
Serial manipulation and above knee plaster casting is done weekly
for the first 6 weeks.
Other options are correct.
1460. Which of the following is the
      management for neglected case of
      CTEV in a patient > 10 years of age?
 a) Triple arthrodesis

 b) Ankle arthrodesis

 c) Jess fixation

 d) Ponseti casting



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Triple arthrodesis
* All these require surgical correction and the surgery depends upon
the age of the patient.
  - < 4 years of age :- Postero-medial soft tissue release
  - > 4 years :- Postero-medial soft tissue release with a bony
procedure :-
* 4 - 8 years :- Dilwyn - Evans procedure (PMR + Calcaneo-cuboid
fusion)
* 8 - 10 years :- PMR + Wedge tarsectomy
* > 10 years :- Triple arthrodesis (subtalar, calcaneo-cuboid, and
talonavicular joints)
1461. Osteoporosis is seen in all the following
      except
 a) Thyrotoxicosis

 b) Rheumatoid arthritis

 c) Hypoparathyroidism

 d) Steroid therapy



Correct Answer - C
Answer is C (Hypoparathyroidism) :
Osteoporosis as associated with lzyperparathyroidism (not
hypoparathyroidism).
DISEASES ASSOCIATED WITH AN INCREASED RISK OF
GENERALIZED OSTEOPOROSIS IN ADULTS :
                              Nutritional and gastrointestinal
Hypogonadal States            disorders
Turner Syndrome               Malnutrition
Klinefelter syndrome          Parenteral nutrition
Anorexia nervosa              Malabsorption syndromes
Hypothalmic amenorrhea        Gastrectomy
Other primary or secondary    Severe liver disease, especially
hypogonadal states            biliary cirrhosis
                              Pernicious anemia
                              Hematologic disorders /
Endocrine disorders           Malignancy
Cushing's syndrome            Multiple disorders/malignancy
Hyperparathyroidism           Lymphoma and leukemia
                              Malignancy-associated parathyroid
Thyrotoxicosis
                              hormone - related (PTHrP)
Insulin-dependent diabetes
Insulin-dependent diabetes
                             production
mellitus
Acromegaly                   Mastocytosis
Adrenal insufficiency        Hemophilia
                             Thalassemia
Selected inherited &
                             Miscellaneous
Rheumatologic disorders
Osteogenesis imperfectaQ     ImmobilizationQ
                             Chronic obstructive pulmonary
Marfan syndromeQ
                             disease
Hemochromatosis              Pregnancy and lactation
HypophosphatasiaQ            Scoliosis
Glycogen storage diseases    Multiple sclerosis
HomocystinuriaQ              Sarcoidosis
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome       Amyloidosis
Porphyria                    Alcoholism
Menkes' syndrome
Epidermolysis bullosa
Rheumatoid arthritis
DRUGS ASSOCIATED WITH AN INCREASED RISK OF
GENERALIZED OSTEOPOROSIS IN ADULTS :
Glucocorticoids2             Excessive thyroxin
CyclosporineQ                Aluminium
Cytotoxic drugs              Gonadotropin-releasing
Anticonvulsants              hormone agonistsQ
Excessive alcohol            Heparin
                             Lithium
1462. Which of the following is not true about
      SCFE?
 a) Males are affected more frequently

 b) Extension is restricted

 c) Commonly occurs during adolescence

 d) Varus, adduction and external rotation deformities are present



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Extension is restricted
SCFE is the separation of proximal femoral capital epiphysis (head)
at growth plate.
SCFE occurs due to weakness of growth plate and occurs during
adolescent period (11-15 years) when the growth plate is weak due
to accelerated growth.
Males are affected more frequently than females.
Movements are restricted particularly abduction and internal rotation.
Flexion is also restricted and extension is increased. And this clinical
feature differentiates SCFE with all other hip pathologies because
most of the hip pathologies have opposite deformity, i.e. flexion
deformity with restricted extension.
Varus, adduction and external rotation deformities are present.
External rotation is increased along with extension.
When hip is flexed it goes into external rotation, i.e. obligatory
external rotation. It is a very important sign of SCFE.
Waddling gait is present.
Trendelenburg's test is positive.
1463. Genu recurvatum is seen in -
 a) Rheumatoid arthritis

 b) Poliomyelitis

 c) Rickets

 d) All the above



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. All the above
a) Congenital recurvatum
 This may be due to abnormal intra-uterine posture; it usually
recovers spontaneously. Rarely, gross hyperextension is the
precursor of true congenital dislocation of the knee.
b) Lax ligaments
Normal people with generalized joint laxity tend to stand with their
knees backset. Prolonged traction, especially on a frame, or holding
the knee hyperextended in plaster, may overstretch ligaments,
leading to permanent hyperextension deformity. Ligaments may also
become overstretched following chronic or recurrent synovitis
(especially in rheumatoid arthritis), the hypotonia of rickets, the
flailness of poliomyelitis or the insensitivity of Charcot's disease.
   1464. Psoriatic arthritis most commonly
         involves which joint -
    a) Distal interphalangeal joint

    b) Proximal interphalangeal joint

    c) Wrist joint

    d) Metacarpophalangeal joint



   Correct Answer - A
   Answer- A. Distal interphalangeal joint
   These include :
1. Arthritis of distal interphalangeal (DIP) joints
2. Assymetrical oligoarthritis : Most common pattern
3. Symmetrical polyarthritis similar to RA
4. Axial involvement (sacroiliac and spine) similar to ankylosing
   spondylitis
5. Arthritis multilans
1465. Which of the following is/are feature/s
      of sprengels deformity?
 a) Elevated shoulder on affected side

 b) Smaller than usual scapula

 c) Short neck

 d) All the above



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. All the above
Sprengel's deformity : Deformity is the only symptom and it may be
noticed at birth. The shoulder on the affected side is elevated; the
scapula looks and feels abnormally high, smaller than usual and
somewhat prominent; occasionally both scapulae are affected.
1466. Tinel sign is seen in ?
 a) Nerve degeneration

 b) Nerve regeneration

 c) Muscle degeneration

 d) Muscle regeneration



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Nerve regeneration
Pathological changes after nerve injury
After nerve injury, nerve first degenerates and then tries to
regenerate.
Nerve degeneration
The part of the neurone distal to the point of injury undergoes
secondary or Wallerian degeneration; the proximal part undergoes
primary or retrograde degeneration upto a single node.
Nerve regeneration
As regeneration begins, the axonal stump from the proximal
segment begins to grow distally. If the endoneural tube with its
contained Schwann cells is intact, the axonal sprout may readily
pass along its primary course and reinnervate the end-organ. The
rate of recovery of axon is 1 mm per day. The muscles nearest to
the site of injury recovers first, followed by others as the nerve
reinnervates muscles from proximal to distal, the so-called motor
march.
When the skin over the nerve is percussed gently from distal to
proximal, the patient gets a tingling sensation if the nerve is
recovering. This is called Tinel's sign and is a sign of recovery.
1467. All are true about Marie - strumpell
      disease except :
 a) Most commonly involves the sacro - iliac joints

 b) Enhesitis is common

 c) More common in males

 d) Roentgenogram is the most sensitive investigation



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Roentgenogram is the most sensitive investigation
Marie — Strumpell disease is also known as Ankylosing Spondylitis
In the early disease process, plain x-rays (Roentgenogram) may be
read as normal —> not very sensitive.
Ankylosing spondylitis primarily affects axial skeleton. The disease
usually begins in the sacro-iliac joints and usually extends upwards
to involve the lumbar, thoracic, and often cervical spine. In the worst
cases the hips or shoulders are also affected. Hip joint is the most
commonly affected peripheral joint.
It is more common in males (male to female ratio 2-3 : 1)
1468. Most commonly lesion associated with
      pathological fracture in hand is -
 a) Enchondroma

 b) Metastases

 c) Osteoid osteoma

 d) Osteochondroma



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Enchondroma
In hand pathological fractures are most commonly associated with
benign bone tumors.
About 23 % of the bone tumors in hand present with pathological
fractures.
The average age of presentation is 37 years.
The most common bone affected is the proximal phalynx, the fifth
ray was involved in 44% of the patients.
Majority (approximately 88%) of the pathological fractures are
caused by enchondromas.
1469. Most common primary bone tumour of hand is:
 a) Osteoma

 b) Osteochondroma

 c) Enchondroma

 d) None of the above



Correct Answer - C
Enchondromas arise from cartilage and are the most common primary bone tumors of the
hand. These lesions account for >90% of bone tumors seen in the hand.

Ref: Schwartz’s principle of surgery 9th edition, chapter 44.
Commonest bone malignancies                      -> Secondaries
(metastases)
Commonest primary malignant tumor                > Multiple
myeloma
Commonest primary malignant tumor o long bones
Osteosarcoma
Commonest benign tumor of bonne                  -
Osteochondroma
(Osteochondroma is not ture neoplasm since its growth stops with
cessation of growth at the epiphyseal plate)
Commonest true benign tumor of bone               -> Osteroid
osteoma
Commonest benign tumor of hand                  -     Enchondroma
1470. Most common malignant bone
      tumor-
a) Osteogenic sarcoma

b) Secondaries

c) Osteoma

d) Enchondroma



Correct Answer - B
Ans. is 'b' i.e., Secondaries
o Secondaries are most common malignant bone tumor.
o Osteogenic sarcoma is the most common primary malignant bone
tumor. o Osteoma is most common benign bone tumor.
1471. Age group affected by osteosarcoma -
 a) Upto 10 years

 b) 10 - 20 years

 c) 30 - 40 years

 d) Older than 45 years



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. 10 - 20 years
Osteogenic sarcoma is the most common primary malignant tumor
of bone in children.
This is predominantly a tumor of childhood or adolescence, occuring
most commonly in the 10-25 years.
The most common site of involvement is metaphysis of long bone
around knee : -
Lower end of femur (45%)
Upper end of Tibia (25%)
1472. Which is intramendullary tumor among
      carcinoma of bone -
 a) Classical Osteosarcoma

 b) Parosteal osteosarcoma

 c) Periosteal osteosarcoma

 d) None of the above



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Classical Osteosarcoma
In its classic (intramedullary) form, osteosarcoma is a highly
malignant tumor arising within the bone and spreading rapidly
outwards to the periosteum and surrounding soft tissue. The tumor
most commonly begins in the metaphysis. Osteosarcoma arises
from primitive bone - forming cells. Tumor destroys the bone
structure and eventually bursts into the surrounding soft tissues.
1473. 33 yr old female presents with a slow
      growing bony mass along the distal
      femur cortex in the metaphyseal region
      with an appreciable gap between the
      cortex and tumor without any cortical
      invasion. What is the usual treatment
      for the same?
 a) Local resection

 b) Amputaion

 c) Chemotherapy

 d) Radiotherapy



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Local resection
Slow growing bony mass along the distal femur cortex in the
metaphyseal region with an appreciable gap between the cortex and
tumor without any cortical invasion in an individual in the 3rd or LIth
decade of life is suggestive of - parosteal osteosarcoma. Local
resection of the lesion is the usual treatment for parosteal
osteosarcoma.
1474. First radiological sign for active
      tubercular arthritis is -
 a) Localized osteoporosis

 b) Sclerosis

 c) Joint space reduction

 d) Osteophytes



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Localized osteoporosis
In tubercular arthritis, localized osteoporosis is the first radiological
sign of active disease.
  1475. Which of the following is not true about
        the management of potts paraplegia?
    a) Chemotherapy is the mainstay of conservative management

    b) Paraplegia not improving with conservative treatment even after
       3 - 6 months is an indication for operative intervention

    c) Decompression via anterolateral approach is most preferred

    d) Posterior fusion and instrumentation can be used to correct the
       deformity



   Correct Answer - C
   Answer- C. Decompression via anterolateral approach is most
   preferred
   The following measures are adopted in the treatment of Pott's
   paraplegia :
   1) Conservative treatment
   Chemotherapy (ATTs) is the mainstay of conservative treatment.
   Immobilization by traction (in cervical spine) or brace (in dorsal
   region).
   Physiotherapy of paralysed limb.
   2) Surgical treatment
1. Following are the main indications for surgery.
2. Failed conservative treatment :- Paraplegia does not show
   improvement by conservative treatment even after 3-6 months.
3. Patient develops paraplegia while on conservative treatment.
4. Paraplegia getting worse despite adequate conservative treatment.
5. In doubtful diagnosis.
6. Rapid onset paraplegia
7. Recurrence of paraplegia after improvement initialy.
   Operative procedure for Pott's paraplegia
   There are various procedures, the most commonly used procedure
   is anterior decompression by surgical debridement (removal dead,
   necrotic & caseous material) followed by autogenous strut grafting.
   The logic is well understood; the compression is from anterior side
   most of the time because tuberculosis occurs in vertebral body
   which lies anterior to the spinal cord. So, anterior decompression is
   the best procedure.
   Anterior decompression can be caused by :
1. Anterior approach : - Called anterior decompression. It is the most
   preferred procedure.
2. Anterolateral approach : - Called anterolateral decompression.
   Other surgical procedures (other than anterior decompression)
   are :
1. Costo-transversectomy
2. Posterior fusion and instrumentation to correct kyphotic deformity.
3. Laminectomy
1476. Tuberculosis of spine most commonly
      affects which vertebral segment?
 a) Upper dorsal

 b) Lower dorsal

 c) Lumbar

 d) Cervical



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Lower dorsal
The spine is the commonest site of bone and joint tuberculosis. The
most common site is Dorsolumbar region. Lower dorsal (thoracic)
region is the most common segment involved followed by lumbar
segment. The tuberculosis of spine is also called pott's disease or
tubercular spondylytis.
   1477. A 20 year old male presents with history
         of gradual onset pain and swelling in
         left knee since 6 months. Now since last
         1 month patient has started limping
         while walking and also has flexion
         deformity of knee. Ultrasonography
         shows presence of synovial thickening.
         What is the most probable diagnosis?
    a) Tuberculosis of knee

    b) Pigmented villonodular synovitis

    c) Synovial sarcoma

    d) Hemarthrosis



   Correct Answer - A
   Answer- A. Tuberculosis of knee
   Unilateral monoarticular knee involvement with gradual onset pain
   swelling and flexion deformity, with synovial thickening is most
   probably suggestive of tuberculosis of knee.
   Presenting complaints :
   The patient, usually in the age group of 10-25 years, presents with
   complaints of pain and swelling in the knee
   On Examination:
1. Swelling : The joint is swollen, which may be due to synovial
   hypertrophy or effusion.
2. Muscle atrophy
3. Cold abscess
4. Sinus
5. Deformity
6. The movements at the joint are limited
1478. X-ray appearance of sequestrum is -
 a) Unnatural radiodense fragments

 b) Osteopenic fragment

 c) Fragment with honeycomb loculated appearance

 d) Radiolucent area with speckled calcification



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Unnatural radiodense fragments
Sequestrum is a piece of dead bone, surrounded by infected
granulation tissue trying to eat the sequestrum away.
On x-ray, sequestra show up as unnatural dense fragments, in
contrast to the surrounding osteopenic bone
1479. Cubitus valgus develops as
      complication of -
 a) Jupitor fracture

 b) Smiths fracture

 c) Malgaigne fracture

 d) Staddle fracture



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Jupitor fracture
Fracture of lateral condyle of humerus (Jupitor fracture)
1480. Most common site for the osteoporotic
      vertebral fracture is ?
 a) Dorsolumbar spine

 b) Cervical spine

 c) Lumbosacral spine

 d) Dorsal spine



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., Dorsolumbar spine
Osteoporosis is an asymptomatic disorder unless complications
(predominantly fractures) occur.
Most common symptom of osteoporosis is back pain secondary to
vertebral compression fracture.
Dorso-lumbar spine is the most frequent site.
Other common sites of fracture are lower end radius (Colle's
fracture) and fracture neck femur.
Osteoporotic fracture (fragile fractures) are : (i) Fracture vertebrae
(most common), (ii) Colle's fracture, (iii) Fracture neck femur.
Serum calcium, phosphate and alkaline phosphatase are normal in
osteoporosis.
1481. A patient presents with wrist trauma.
      On investigations patient is diagnosed
      to have a sprained wrist, without any
      evidence of fracture. There is
      tenderness in anatomical snuffbox.
      Which ligament is commonly involved -
 a) Scapholunate ligament

 b) Radial collateral ligament

 c) Lunotriquetral ligament

 d) Ulnar collateral ligament



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Scapholunate ligament
Lunate and scapholunate ligmante- Tender in lunate fracture and
scapholunate dissociation
1482. Trendelenburg test is positive due to
      injury to which of the following nerve?
 a) Obturator

 b) Sciatic

 c) Superior Gluteal

 d) Inferior Gluteal



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Superior Gluteal
A positive Trendelenburg is relatively non-specific and may
indicate:
Pain (e.g. due to osteoarthritis of the hip joint)
Weak hip abductors (gluteus medius, gluteus minimus)
Short femoral neck/ fracture of neck
Dislocation or subluxation of the hip
Neuropathy
Gluteus medius and minimus are supplied by Superior Gluteal
nerve.
Trendelenburg test
Normally when a person is made to stand on one leg, the hip
abductors of the ipsilateral side raise the opposite and the
unsupported side of the pelvis. If the abductor mechanism is
defective, the unsupported side of the pelvis drops and this is known
as positive Trendelenburg test.
1483. False about osteoarthritis is ?
 a) Involves synovial joints

 b) Progressive softening of the articular cartilage

 c) It is an inflammatory arthritis

 d) Marginal osteophytes are produced



Correct Answer - C
Ans. is 'c' i.e., It is an inflammatory arthritis
Osteoarthritis (OA) is a chronic disorder of synovial joints in which
there is progressive softening and disintegration of articular cartilage
accompanied by new growth of cartilage and bone at the joint
margins (osteophytes), cyst formation and sclerosis in the
subchondral bone, mild synovitis and capsular fibrosis.
The term osteoarthritis is a misnomer as it is a non-inflammatory
condition.
The right term is osteoarthrosis or degenerative joint disorder
because it is a degenerative wear - and - tear process occuring in
joints.
1484. Shentons line is seen in X ray of -
 a) Antero-posterior pelvis with both hips

 b) Antero-posterior shoulder

 c) Lateral cervical spine

 d) Lateral lumbosacral spine



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Antero-posterior pelvis with both hips
With a normal hip Shenton's line, which continues from the inferior
border of the femoral neck to the inferior border of the pubic ramus,
looks continuous; any interruption in the line suggests an abnormal
position of the femoral head.
Narrowing of the joint 'space' is a sign of articular cartilage loss, a
feature of both inflammatory and non-inflammatory arthritis.
1485. False about osteogenesis imperfecta is
      -
 a) Defective collagen formation

 b) Associated with cataract formation

 c) Autosomal dominant

 d) Known as Brittle bone disease



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Associated with cataract formation
Osteogenesis imperfecta, also known as brittle bone disease or
Lobstein syndrome, is a hereditary condition characterized by
fragility of bones, deafness, blue sclera, laxity of joints and tendency
to improve with age.
It is a disease of defective collagen formation. Therefore, collagen -
containing tissues are affected, e.g. bone, teeth, skin, tendons and
ligaments.
Primary defect in bone is defective osteoid formation.
It is usually transmitted as an autosomal dominant, but in a severe
variant of the disease the parents are normal and a fresh gene
mutation or autosomal recessive inheritance is postulated.
Radiology shows wormian bones in the skull.
1486. Most mobile segment of vertebral
      column is -
 a) Cervical

 b) Thoracic

 c) Lumbar

 d) Sacral



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Cervical
The spinal column can be divided into three mobile (cervical,
thoracic, and lumbar regions) and two fused (sacrum and coccyx).
Cervical region: It is the most mobile region of the spinal column with
range of motion of approximately 80 - 90 degrees of flexion, 70
degrees of extention, 20 - 45 degrees of lateral flexion, and upto 90
degrees of rotation to both sides
1487. Chauffeur fracture is -
 a) Extra - articular fracture of styloid process

 b) Intra - articular fracture of styloid process

 c) Intra - articular fracture of base of 1st metacarpal

 d) Extra - articular fracture of base of 1st metacarpal



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Intra - articular fracture of styloid process
An intra-articular oblique fracture of the styloid process of the radius.
1488. Treatment of choice in Acute myositis
      ossificans is:
 a) Immobilization of elbow

 b) Short wave diathermy

 c) Passive movements of arm

 d) Active exercises



Correct Answer - A
A i.e. Immobilization of elbow
* Rest of the affected part during the period while the process is
active is the basic principle of treatment(TN 91) .
* No massage should be given.
* If any physical therapy is going on, it should be discontinued
immediately.
* All passive movements and vigorous exercise must be stopped.
Very gentle exercise must be started.
* Indomethacin and radiotherapy prevent calcification. However,
radiotherapy should be avoided in children.
  - Surgical excision is indicated if myositis ossificans interferes with
function. It is worth noting that surgical excision
is contraindicated during active phase when calcification
matures.
* Surgical excision, if required, should be done only after
complete maturation of ossification.
1489. What is the treatment for patient with
      hypertrophic nonunion with deformity
      at fracture site?
 a) No treatment required

 b) Fixation only

 c) Bone grafting only

 d) Fixation with bone grafting



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Fixation only
Patients with hypertrophic nonunion have sufficient vascularity to
heal but stability is lacking or normal axial alignment has not been
restored. Thus in a case of hypertrophic nonunion without deformity,
fixation alone will provide stability and will lead to healing.
1490. Proximal tibial epiphysis fuses at -
 a) 12 - 14 years

 b) 14 - 16 years

 c) 16 - 18 years

 d) 18 - 20 years



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. 16 - 18 years
The tibia ossifies from three centres, one in the shaft and one in
each epiphysis. Ossification begins in midshaft at about the seventh
intrauterine week.
The proximal epiphysial centre is usually present at birth: at
approximately 10 years a thin anterior process from the centre
descends to form the smooth part of the tibial tuberosity.
1491. Management of displaced non
      comminuted intercondylar humerus
      fracture is -
 a) Open reduction internal fixation

 b) Above elbow plaster slab application

 c) Olecranon pin traction

 d) External fixation



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Open reduction internal fixation
It depends upon the displacement.
An undisplaced fracture needs support in an above-elbow plaster
slab for 3-4 weeks, followed by exercises.
A displaced fracture is treated generally by open reduction and
internal fixation.
In cases with severe comminution, olecranon pin traction is given to
reduce the fracture and maintain the reduction.
1492. MC cause of Primary Amenorrhea is ?
 a) Constitutional/idiopathic

 b) RMKH syndrome

 c) Ovarian dysgenesis

 d) None of the above



Correct Answer - C
Ans, C. Ovarian dysgenesis
MC cause of primary amenorrhea is ovarian dysgenesis/Turner
syndrome.
1493. An infertile woman has bilateral tubal
      block at cornua diagnosed on
      hysterosalpingography. Next treatment
      of choice is ?
 a) IVF

 b) Laparoscopy and hysteroscopy

 c) Tuboplasty

 d) Hydrotubation



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Laparoscopy and hysteroscopy
Laparoscopy (with chromopertubation with methylene blue
dye):
Best investigation for tubal patency, as tubal patency can be
confirmed under vision, and besides, any pathology can
simultaneously be corrected with operative laparoscoPy.
1494. Fetal karyotyping can be done by all,
      EXCEPT?
 a) Cordocentesis

 b) Amniocentesis

 c) CVS

 d) Fetal skin biopsy



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Fetal skin biopsy
Percutaneous umbilical blood sampling (PUBS) is also known as
cordocentesisis performed after 16 weeks' gestation' under USG
guidance a needle is inserted into umbilical vein. This technique
apart from karyotyping is also useful for evaluating fetal metabolism
and hematologic abnormalities.
1495. 55 year old lady complaints of mass in
      the vagina, which is reducible &
      increases on defecation. The diagnosis
      is?
 a) Rectal prolapse

 b) Uterine prolapse

 c) Cervical fibroid

 d) Vaginal cancer



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Uterine prolapse
Prolapse is defined as the displacement of an organ from its normal
anatomical position.
Genital prolapse occurs due to weakness of the suPPorts.
1496. Moschowit's surgery is done for -
 a) Cervical cancer

 b) Fundal fibroids

 c) Uterine prolapse

 d) Enterocele prevention



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Enterocele prevention
Enteroceleformatiol can be prevented by Moschowit's or Halban's
surgeries, in both the POD is obliterated.
1497.         Which of the following is used in
                  quantifying hirsutism?
 a) Bishop score

 b) Rotterdam criteria

 c) Ferriman-Gallwey score

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Ferriman-Gallwey score
The Ferriman-Gallwey score is a method of evaluating and
quantifying hirsutism in women. The method was originally published
in l96l by D. Ferriman and J.D. Gallwey in the Journal of Clinical
Endocrinology.
1498. MC heart disease in pregnancy is ?
 a) MS

 b) AS

 c) MR

 d) WPW syndrome



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. MS
Mitral stenosis is the MC valvular heart disease in pregnancy.
1499. Rate of cervical dilatation in
      primigravida is ?
 a) 0.8 cm/hour

 b) 1.2 cm/hour

 c) 1.5 cm/hour

 d) 2 cm/hour



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. 0.8 cm/hour
The normal rate of cervical dilatation in active phase is 1.2 cm/hour
in primigravidae and 1.5 cm/hour in multiparae.
1500. Complications of pre eclampsia are all
      except ?
a) Post datism

b) DIC

c) Blindness

d) None of the above



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Post datism
1501. What is monitored in a patient of pre
      eclamsia ?
 a) Uric acid

 b) Platelet count

 c) LFT

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. All of the above
  1502. Not an absolute contraindication for
        methylergometrine use is ?
   a) Eclampsia

   b) Heart disease

   c) Rh incompatibility

   d) After delivery of first baby in twin pregnancy



   Correct Answer - C
   Ans. C. Rh incompatibility
   Methylergometrine (Methergin) can be used in the prevention
   and treatment of PPH. Absolute contraindications to the use of
   Methergin are:
1. Chronic hypertension/preeclampsia/eclampsia
2. Heart disease inpregnancy
3. Afterthe deliveryofthefirstbabyofthe twins.
1503. A lady with 35 weeks of pregnancy is
      admitted in view of first episode of
      painless bout of bleeding yesterday. On
      examination Hb 10g%, BP 120/70
      mmHg, uterus relaxed, and cephalic
      floating. FHS regular. Next line of
      management is ?
 a) Cesarean section

 b) Induction of labor

 c) Wait and watch

 d) Blood transfusion



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Wait and watch
This is a case of placenta previa (painless bleeding, relaxed uterus,
and floating head all point to placenta previa).
In this case, all the criteria for conservative management are fulfilled
and therefore the answer is wait and watch for fetal lung maturity.
1504. G3P2L2 with previous 2 LSCS with
      anterior placenta previa has got a very
      high risk of which complication?
 a) Placenta acreta

 b) Vasa previa

 c) Abruption

 d) None of the above



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Placenta acreta
The term placenta accreta is used to describe any placental
implantation in which there is abnormally firm adherence to the
uterine wall.
The incidence of placenta accreta, increta, and percreta has
increased, most likely because of the increasedcesarean delivery
rate.
1505. B-Lynch suture is applied on ?
 a) Cervix

 b) Uterus

 c) Fallopian tubes

 d) Ovaries



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Uterus
Described first by Christopher, B-Lynch is a compression suture
placed on uterus in the management of atonic PPH when the
medical methods fail.
1506. A 28-year-old primigravida with 33
      weeks of pregnancy suddenly
      complains of headache, oliguria, and
      blurred vision. Her BP is 180/110 and
      urine albumin is +3. The line of further
      management is ?
 a) Wait and watch

 b) LSCS

 c) Induction of labor

 d) Anticonvulsant + antihypertensive therapy



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Anticonvulsant + antihypertensive therapy
The patie nt is a case of severe preeclampsia, with impending
eclampsia.
Magnesium sulfate is the drug of choice for eclampsia and also for
impendingeclampsia.
1507. Which of the following statements
      concerning abdominal pregnancy is
      correct?
 a) Gastrointestinal symptoms are quite often very severe

 b) Fetal survival is approximately 80%

 c) Aggressive attempts should be made to remove the placenta at
    the time of initial surgery

 d) Placenta can be left in situ at the time of surgery



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Placenta can be left in situ at the time of surgery
Although leaving the placenta in the abdomen following surgical
delivery predisposes to riskesof postoperative infections, the risk is
much less severe than the hemorrhage associated with attempts of
removal of placenta at the time of primary surgery.
1508. Complete vesicular mole is associated
      Theca leutin csyts in what percentage
      of cases ?
 a) <5

 b) 5-15

 c) 20-40

 d) 60-70



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. 20-40
Theca-lutein cysts: In many cases of hydatidiform mole, the ovaries
contain multiple theca-lutein cysts.
1509. Patient with 3 months amenorrhoea, c/o
      hyperemesis and vaginal bleeding since
      one month. O/E=uterus 16 weeks with
      absent fetal heart sound. The diagnosis
      is ?
 a) Vesicular mole

 b) Ectopic pregnancy

 c) IUFD

 d) Abruptio placentae



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Vesicular mole
Vesicular mole is an abnormal condition of placenta where there is
hydropic degeneration and proliferative changes in the young
chorionic villi. It is a benign condition with malignant potential.
Uterine bleeding is almost universal and may vary from spotting to
profuse hemorrhage.
It is the MC presenting feature.
The discharge has' white currant in red currant juice' appearance.
1510. Patient with choriocarcinoma &
      jaundice, treatment of choice is ?
a) Methotreaxate

b) Actinomycin D

c) Suction evacuation

d) Combination of all



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Actinomycin D
1511. EMACO regime is for ?
a) Ca cervix

b) Ca endometrium

c) Ca ovary

d) Chorio carcinoma



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Chorio carcinoma
1512. Stage lb cervical cancer is diagnosed in
      a young woman. Assuming that the
      cancer is confirmed to the cervix and
      that intraoperative biopsies are
      negative, which of the following
      structure would not be removed during
      the radical hysterectomy?
 a) Uterosacral and uterovesical ligaments

 b) Pelvic nodes

 c) The entire parametrium on both sides of the cervix

 d) Both ovaries



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Both ovaries
Preservation of the ovaries is generally acceptable, particularly in
younger women.
1513. In vaginal hysterectomy, the first clamp
      includes:
 a) Uterine artery

 b) Fallopian tube & round ligament

 c) Uterosacral ligament

 d) None of the above



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Uterosacral ligament
Vaginal hysterectomy with pelvic floor repair is done for
vaginouterine prolapse in peri/post menopausal women.
First clamp includes uteroscaral&Macenrodt's ligament.
Second clamp includes uterine artery.
Third clamp includes cornual structures.
1514. Therapeutic conization is indicated in?
 a) Microinvasive carcinoma cervix stage lal

 b) CIN III

 c) Unsatisfactory colposcopy with cervical dysplasia

 d) Cervical metaplasia



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Microinvasive carcinoma cervix stage lal
In stage 1A1, there is no lymph node involvement.
Therapeutic conization is the surgery of choice for stage 1A1 in
young patients who are desirous of future childbearing
1515. Cervical cancer III B treatment is ?
 a) Wertheim's operation

 b) Radiotherapy

 c) Chemotherapy

 d) Chemoradiation



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Chemoradiation
Cisplatin is given before RT as a radiosensltizer, hence the preferred
terminology is CTRT (concurrent chemo and radiotherapy also
known as chemoradiation).
1516. Wertheim's hysterectomy is done for ?
 a) 1A1 cervical cancer

 b) IB cervical cancer

 c) Germ cell ovarian cancer

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. IB cervical cancer
Stages of Ca cervix that are operable (radical/Wertheim's
hysterectomy) are 1A2, IB, and IIA.
1517. Radio isotope used in Ca cervix
      Brachytherapy ?
 a) Cobalt

 b) Iridium

 c) Cesium

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. All of the above
   1518. Ca vulva spreads to all except ?
    a) Urethra

    b) Deep inguinal nodes

    c) Superficial inguinal nodes

    d) Paraaortic nodes



   Correct Answer - D
   Ans. D. Paraaortic nodes
   Modes of spread of ca. vulva
1. Direct: Urethra, Vagina, Rectum, pelvic bones
2. Lymphatic: MC route of spread.
3. Lymphatics oflabia to superficial, then deep inguinal nodes & then
   pelvic nodes
4. Hematogenous route rare & may occur in advanced cases
1519. Which ovarian tumour can present with
      menorrhagia ?
 a) Demoid cyst

 b) Epithelial ovarian cancer

 c) Granulosa cell tumour

 d) Yolk sac tumour



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Granulosa cell tumour
Granulosa cell tumours (or granulosa-theca cell tumours) are
tumours that arise fromgranulosa cells. These tumoursare part of the
sex cordgonadal stromal tumour or non-epithelial group of tumours.
1520. All are risk factors for ectopic
      pregnancy except ?
 a) Past history

 b) Tubal ligation failure

 c) IVF

 d) LNG IUCD



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. LNG IUCD
IUCD: The modern copper IIJD does not increase the rkk of ectopic
pregnancy. However, there is a relative increase in tubal pregnancy
(7 times more) should pregnancy occur with IUCD in situ.
Studies have demonstrated that up to l% of pregnancies achieved
through IVF or GIFT can result in a heterotopic gestation.
1521. A 21-year-old female presents to
      emergency ward with 2 months of
      amenorrhea with pain in abdomen and
      shock. BP 90/60 mmHg and Hb 6 gm%.
      Urine pregnancy test is found positive.
      Next immediate line of treatment is ?
 a) Laparotomy

 b) IV fluids & cross match

 c) Medical management

 d) Laparoscopy



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. IV fluids & cross match
This is a case of ruptured ectopic pregnancy. Positive Urine
Pregnancy Test indicates that the amenorrhea is due to pregnancy.
Pain and shock in early pregnancy are mostly always due to
ruptured ectopic.
1522. DOC for medical management of
      ectopic pegnancy ?
a) Actinomycin D

b) Intramuscular Methotrexate

c) Intramuscular Methotrexate

d) PGf2 alpha



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Intramuscular Methotrexate
1523. What is not used in PCOS ?
 a) OC pills

 b) Cyclical progesterones

 c) Myoinositol

 d) Danazol



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Danazol
Insulin sensitizers are also used to tackle insulin resisitance.
Danazol has no role in PCOS.
1524. Pearl necklace appearance is
      characteristic of ?
 a) Ectopic pregnancy

 b) PCOS

 c) Endometriosis

 d) PID



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. PCOS
USG features of polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS)
Greater than 12 follicles measuring between 2 mm and 9 mm in
diameter located peripherally, resulting in a pearl necklace
appearance.
Increased echogenicity of ovarianstroma and /or ovarian volume
greater than 10 ml.
1525. Violin string adhesion [violent string
      sign] is seen in ?
 a) PCOS

 b) Endometriosis

 c) Fitz - high -curtis syndrome

 d) Ruptured ectopic pregnancy



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Fitz - high -curtis syndrome
Laparoscopy is performed, the liver capsule will appear inflamed,
with classic violin string adhesions in the perietal peritoneum
beneath the diaphragm.
Five percent to 10% of women with acute PID develop symptoms of
perihepatic inflammation, the Fitz-High-Curtis syndrome.
1526. Dysgerminoma spreads mainly via ?
 a) Hematogenous route

 b) Lymphatic route

 c) Direct spread

 d) Does not spread



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Lymphatic route
Dysgerminomas are the most common malignant germ cell tumors,
accounting for about 30% to 40% of all ovarian cancers of germ cell
origin.
In the 25% of patients who present with metastatic disease, the
tumor most commonly spreads via the lymphatics.
1527. Triad of symptoms of endometriosis are
      all except ?
 a) Infertility

 b) Dysmenorrhea

 c) Dyspareunia

 d) Cyclical hematuria



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Cyclical hematuria
Endometriosis is defined as the presence of normal functional
endometrial mucosa (glands and stroma) abnormally implanted in
locations other than the uterine cavity. It was first described by Von
Rokitansky About one third of women with endometriosis remain
asymptomatic.
1528. Complication of Benign Ovarian Cysts
      is ?
 a) Torsion

 b) Intracystic hemorrhage

 c) Pseudomyxoma perotonei

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. All of the above
1529. Level 1 support of uterus & vagina is ?
 a) levator ani

 b) Perineal body

 c) Uterosacral ligaments

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Uterosacral ligaments
Delancey’s three levels of pelvic (uterus, vagina) support=
Level 1: The uterosacral-cardinal ligament complex provides
attachment of the uterus and vaginal vault to the sacrum. Uterine
prolapse occurs when this ligament complex breaks or is attenuated.
1530. MC presenting symptom of fibroid is ?
a) Menorrhagia

b) Infertility

c) Lump

d) Compression



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Menorrhagia
1531. Medical management of fibroids is with
      all except -
a) Progesterone

b) Mifepristone

c) Ulipristal acetate

d) Misoprostol



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Misoprostol
1532. Endometriosis is ?
 a) Endometrium within the myometrium

 b) Functional endometrium outside the uterus

 c) Myometrium within the endometrium

 d) Rare squamous variety of CA endometrium



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Functional endometrium outside the uterus
Endometriosis
Definition: Presence of functional endometrium at places other than
uterus (ectopic endometrial tissue)
  1533.      Samson's theory for Development of
                    Endometriosis is ?
    a) Celomic metaplasia

    b) Hematogenous spread

    c) Lymphatic spread

    d) Retrograde menstruation



   Correct Answer - D
   Ans. D. Retrograde menstruation
   Theories for Development of Endometriosis
1. Samson's theory of retrograde menstruation: the most accEpted
   theory
2. Ivanoff and Meyer: Celomic metaplasia
3. HematogenoussPread
4. Lymphatic spread (Halban's theory)
5. Direct implantation.
1534. Examination of a 26 years old obese
      infertile female reveals. Fixed
      retroverted uterus & Nodularity of the
      uterosacral ligaments. The most likely
      diagnosis is ?
 a) PCOS

 b) Endometriosis

 c) Adenomyosis

 d) TB



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Endometriosis
Pelvic examination of endometriosis: May be normal or may
reveal the following:
Fixed retroverted uterus
Pelvic tenderness
Nodules in the POD
Nodularity of the uterosaoal ligaments
Unilateral or bilateral adnexal mass
Speculum examination may reveal bluish nodules in posterior fornix.
1535. Investigation of choice for
      endometriosis ?
 a) USG

 b) CA 125

 c) MRI

 d) Laparoscopy



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Laparoscopy
Laparoscopy is the Investigation ofChoice.
1536. Powder burnt lesion seen in ?
a) PID

b) PCOS

c) Endometriosis

d) All of the above



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Endometriosis
Laparoscopy findings in endometriosis are:
Chocolate cysts
Blueberrylesion
Red/flame lesion
Powder burn sPots
Red/purple raspberry lesion
Subovarian adhesions
Matchstick burnt sPots
White lesion.
  1537. Treatment of choice in patient with
        infertility & endometriosis ?
    a) IUI

    b) Surgery

    c) Danozol

    d) Ovulation induction



   Correct Answer - B
   Ans. B. Surgery
   Surgical Management
1. Patients with infertility: laparoscopic ovarian cystectomy,
   adhesiolysis, and electrocoagulation of endometriotic implants.
2. If the family is complete and the patient has severe pain or
   menstrual complaints: hysterectomy with bilateral
   salpingooophorectomy. Generally combined approach is adopted
   where laparoscopic surgery is followed by GnRHa.
1538. Surgery of choice in 42 year old P3L3
      with diffuse endometriosis is ?
 a) Ovarian cystectomy & adhesiolysis

 b) Hysterectomy

 c) Hysterectomy with BSO with resection of endometrial implants

 d) Ovarian cystectomy & adhesiolysis & resection of implants



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Hysterectomy with BSO with resection of endometrial
implants
If the family k complete and the patient has severe pain or menstrual
complaints: Hystetectomy with bilateralsalpingo- oophorectomy with
resection of all endometriotic implants.
1539. The most common Mullerian anomaly
      is?
 a) Mullerian agenesis (RMKH)

 b) Unicornuate uterus

 c) Bicornuate uterus

 d) Septate uterus



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Septate uterus
Septate uterus is the MC Mullerian anomaly.
1540. SEAM used in DUB is ?
 a) Clomiphene

 b) Raloxifene

 c) Ormiloxifene

 d) Mifepristone



Correct Answer - C
Ans., C. Ormiloxifene
Ormeloxifene is a third generation benzopyran SERM which blocks
the cytosol receptors by its competitive binding and selectively acts
on estrogen recePtors as agonist and antagonist in different
reproductive tissues.
1541. Choice of adjuvant treatment for
      endometrial carcinoma stage IA, grade I
      is?
 a) Radiotherapy

 b) Chemotherapy

 c) Chemotherapy plus radiotherapy

 d) No treatment



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. No treatment
Management of Ca endometrium
A) Stage l=1:
Surgery (total abdominal hysterectomy with bilateral salpingo-
oophorectomy with lymph node sampling), followed by radiotherapy.
Only patients with stage 1A, grades 1 and 2 do not require
postoperative radiotherapy.
B) Stage 2:
Modified radical hysterectomy, bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy with
lymph node dissection, followed by radiotherapy.
C) Stages 3 and 4:
Debulking surgery followed by radiotherapy.
1542. A 46-year-old P3L3 complains of
      menorrhagia since 3 months. Next line
      of management is ?
 a) D & C

 b) Progesterone x 6 months

 c) OC pills x 6 months

 d) Hysterectomy



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. D & C
In Patients with menorrhagia in perimenopausal age group (40+),
always make the diagnosis first before proceeding with any
treatment.
It is necessary to rule out endometrial hyperplasia and cancer in this
age group. Hence, histopathological examination of endometrium is
required, and therefore D 6C should be done first.
1543. Simple hyperplasia with atypia will
      progress to ca endometrium in % of
      cases ?
 a) 1-2

 b) 3-4

 c) 8-9

 d) 20



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. 8-9
1544. Grade 1 Ca endometrium, there is
      presence of % non sqoumaous growth
      ?
a) <5

b) 6-25

c) 25-50

d) >50



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. <5
FIGO Grading of Endometrial Carcinoma
Histopathologic degree of differentiation:
Gl: < 5% nonsquamous or nonmorular growth pattern.
1545. Definitive treatment of adenomyosis is
      ?
 a) OC pills

 b) NSAIDS

 c) Endometrial ablation

 d) Hysterectomy



Correct Answer - D
Ans, D. Hysterectomy
Hysterectomy
The only way to completely cure this condition is to have a
hysterectomy.
1546. MC cause for hysterectomy is ?
 a) Prolapse

 b) Fibroids

 c) Ca endometrium

 d) Acute PID



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Fibroids
A hysterectomy is an operation to remove the uterus.
A woman may have a hysterectomy for different reasons,
including:
Uterine fibroids that cause pain, bleeding, or other problems.
1547. Prolonged surgery time of vaginal
      hysterectomy would lead to damage to
      which nerve ?
 a) Obturator

 b) Pudendal

 c) Peroneal

 d) Sural



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Peroneal
Most commonly injured lower extremity nerve in patients undergoing
surgery in lithotomy position is the common paroneal nerve(LA-S2).
1548.
Which of the following is not a part of PID -
 a) Endometritis

 b) Cervicitis

 c) Tuboovarian abcess

 d) Peritonitis



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Cervicitis
PID is a spectrum of infection & inflammation of upper genital tract
organs involving uterus, fallopian tubes, ovaries, pelvic
peritoneum&parametrium.
Cervicitis is not included.
1549. Triad for clinical diagnosis PID includes
      all except ?
 a) Fever

 b) Lower abdominal pain

 c) Cervical motion tenderness

 d) Bilateral adnexal tenderness



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Fever
Diagrosis ofPID is often difficult.
The "gold standard" for diagnosis relies on the laparoscopic
appearance ofFallopian tube inflammation but cost and limited
availability of the technique often preclude its use.
In theabsence of laparoscopy, the triad of lower abdominal pain,
cervical motion tenderness, and bilateral adnexal tenderness has
been advocated as the minimal criterion for clinical diagnosis of PID.
1550. Acute salpingitis is most commonly
      caused by ?
 a) N. gonorrhoeae

 b) Chlamydia trachomatis

 c) Mycoplasma

 d) Staphylococcus



Correct Answer - B
Ans, B. Chlamydia trachomatis
Option B is now a days slightly more commoner than option a) &
hence the best option to mark
If polymicrobial/mixed infection, is in the option, then that is the
answer.
1551. Tumor marker for germ cell malignancy
                are all except?
 a) LDH

 b) Alkaline phosphatase

 c) AFP

 d) CA-125



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. CA-125
1552. Acute pelvic pain could be due to ?
 a) Ectopic pregnancy

 b) PID

 c) Corpus luteum hematoma

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. All of the above
1553. Nugent score includes all except -
 a) Lactobacillus

 b) Gardnerella

 c) Mobiluncus

 d) Gonococcus



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Gonococcus
Nugent's criteria for diagnosis ofbacterial vaginosis
Many use Nugent's criteria to quantify or grade bacteria via Gram
stain of vaginal samples.
In brief, Nugent's criteria evaluated 3 types of bacteria via Gram
stain: Lactobacillus, Bacteroides/ Gardnerella, and Mobiluncus.
1554. Clue cells are seen in?
 a) Bacterial vaginosis

 b) Candidiasis

 c) Chlamydiasis

 d) Trichomoniasis



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Bacterial vaginosis
Bacterial vaginosis/vaginitis (BV) is a common vaginal infection.
Clue cells (vaginal epithelial cells covered with coccobacilli and the
cells appear as stippled or granular). CIue cells are diagnostic ofBV.
1555. HSG findings suggestive of genital
      koch ?
 a) Beaded tubes

 b) Honeycomb uterus

 c) Golf club tube

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. All of the above
In active tuberculosis, HSG is contraindicated.
1556. A pregnant lady presents with genital
      warts. The best management for her is
      ?
 a) Imiquimod

 b) Trichloroacetic acid

 c) Podophyllin

 d) Cryotherapy



Correct Answer - D
Ans,. D. Cryotherapy
For reasons unknown genital warts increase in size and number
during pregnancy.
Treatment options during pregnancy include cryotherapy and
trichloroacetic acid (TCA).
Out of the two, cryosurgery is more effective than TCA and hence is
prefnred.
1557. 28 year old female complaints of foul
      smelling yellowish urethral discharge
      since 4 days. History of burning
      micturation. History of sexual contact
      with multiple partners 2 days before the
      onset of symptoms. Most likely
      diagnosis is ?
 a) Syphilis

 b) Chancroid

 c) Gonococcal urethritis

 d) Non-infective urethritis



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Gonococcal urethritis
History of foul smelling mucopurulent discharge , & short incubation
period with high risk exposure clinches the diagnosis
1558. Twin-peak sign is seen in ?
a) All Monozygotic twins

b) Monochorionic twins

c) Dichorionic twins

d) Siamese twins



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Dichorionic twins
1559. In ca Cervix treatment, point A receives
      ?
 a) 3000 cGy

 b) 5000 cGy

 c) 7000 cGy

 d) 10,000 cGy



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. 7000 cGy
Point A and Point B are in relation to radiotherapy for Ca Cervix.
1560. Ashermans syndrome is characterized
      by ?
 a) Amenorrhea

 b) Menorrhagia

 c) Polymenorrhea

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Amenorrhea
Intra-uterine adhesions
Asherman syndrome was identified in 1948 as uterine synechiae.
These intra-uterine adhesions (IUA) are often associated with
amenorrhea or infertility.
1561. GARDASIL vaccine is for -
a) HPV 16,18

b) HSV

c) HPV 6,11,16,18

d) Hepatitis B



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. HPV 6,11,16,18
1562. LNG content of Mirena is -
 a) 20 gms

 b) 20 mg

 c) 52 gms

 d) 52 mgs



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. 52 mgs
Mirena/LNG IUD/LNG 2O/levonova/LNG IUS
Mirenacontainsatotalof52mglevonorgestrel(LNG).LNGisreleasedintotheuterinecavit
at a rate of approximtely20pg/day.
1563. Which of the following decreases the
      risk of Pelvic Inflammatory Disease ?
 a) Cu T

 b) Spermicidal agents

 c) O.C. pills

 d) Today vaginal sponge



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. O.C. pills
Several studies have shown that regular O.C. pill users are
protected from PIDs to the extent of 50%.
1564. Patient with 45 XO , what HRT to be
      given ?
 a) Growth hormone + E+P

 b) Estrogene

 c) No HRT Needed

 d) HRT only after 45 years



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Growth hormone + E+P
Growth hormone (GH) therapy has become the standard of care for
girls with turner syndrome and should be considered as soon as
decreased linear growth velocity is apparent.
Initial hormone replacement involves low dose
estrogenmonotherapy.
Progestagenreplacement is generally added 1-2 yearsafter starting
estrogen or upon breakthrough bleeding.
1565. Tamoxifen decreases the risk of which
      cancer?
 a) Breast

 b) Endometrium

 c) Ovary

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Breast
Tamoxifen has been used for more than 30 years to treat patients
with breast cancer.
Tamoxifenworks against breast cancer, in part, by interfering with
the activity of estrogen, a female hormone that promotes the growth
of breast cancer cells.
In October 1998, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
approved the use of tamoxifen to reduce the incidence of breast
cancer in women at increased risk of the disease.
1566. Raloxifene decreases the risk of which
      cancer?
 a) Breast

 b) Cervix

 c) Ovary

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Breast
After an average of 81 months, raloxifene reduces risk of invasive
breast cancer by about 38 percent compared to tamoxifenreducing
breast cancer by about 50 percent.
1567. Least failure rate ?
 a) CuT

 b) MIRENA

 c) DMPA

 d) O.C. PILLS



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. MIRENA
1568. Nuva ring contains ?
 a) EE+ etonogestrel

 b) LNG + EE

 c) LNG

 d) EE+ drosperinone



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. EE+ etonogestrel
Contraceptive rings
Nuva Ring: It is a soft vaginal ring that releases 15 microgram EE
and 120 microgram ENG, etonogestrel,the active metabolite of
desogestrel, per day as a controlled delivery system.
1569. Which drug used for endometriosis can
      cause increase in hepatic enzyme &
      adverse lipid profile -
 a) 0. C. pills

 b) GnRh analogues

 c) Both of the above

 d) None of the above



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. 0. C. pills
O. C. pills (progesterone component) are a/w increase in LDL &
decrease in HDL cholesterol but estrogens have opposite effect.
Cholestasis &cholestatic jaundice are occasional side effects of O.
C. pills.
1570.         Norgestimate in OC pills has the
                  following advantage ?
 a) Reduces venous thrombosis

 b) Is cheaper than standard OC pills

 c) Reduces acne and hirsutism

 d) Useful in heart disease



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Reduces acne and hirsutism
Three newer progestogens, namely desogestrel, gestodene, and
norgestimatecan decrease the ameanilhirsutism as compared to
olderprogesterones, which actually can cause oily skin and acne.
1571. Which of the following is not an ideal
      candidate for IUCD insertion ?
 a) Previous LSCS

 b) Lactating mother

 c) Acute PID

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Acute PID
1572. Betamethasone given to preterm patient
                 for all except ?
a) Fetal lung maturity

b) Decrease intraventricular hemorrhage

c) Prevents periventricular leukomalacia

d) Prevent PPH



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Prevent PPH
Steroids (dexamethasone or betamethasone) are given to enhance
fetal lung maturity and they also decrease the incidence
intraventricular hemorrhage.
   1573. A 32-year-old female with mild
         hypertension. Two days after normal
         delivery, she develop seizures,
         headache. No proteinuria was there. On
         imaging she was found to have
         parasagittal infarction and hematoma
         3x2cm.The most probable cause is?
    a) Eclampsia

    b) Superior sagittal sinus thrombosis

    c) Pituitary apoplexy

    d) Subarachnoid hemorrhage



   Correct Answer - B
   Ans. B. Superior sagittal sinus thrombosis
   The various etiologies for dural sinus thrombosis are:
1. Thrombophilia (factor V Leiden mutation, prothrombin gene
   mutation20210, deficiencies of antithrombin, protein C and protein S,
   APLA syndrome, hyperhomorysteinemia)
2. Pregnancy
3. Postpartumstate
1574. Penicillamine use in pregnancy is
      associated with this fetal complication
      ?
 a) Conradi syndrome

 b) Renal anomalies

 c) Thymus hypolplasia

 d) Cutis laxa



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Cutis laxa
Pencillamine interferes with synthesis of collagen & elastin & can
cause :elastosisperforansserpiginosa and localized cutis laxa.
1575. The prostaglandin most commonly
      used at term for induction of labor is ?
 a) PGI2

 b) PGE1

 c) PGE2

 d) PGF2a



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. PGE2
PGE2 is most commonly used at term for induction of labor.
1576. HCG levels at which Expectant
      management of Ectopic pregnancy can
      be done :
 a) 10000 IU/L

 b) 1000 IU/L

 c) 2500 IU/L

 d) 5000 IU/L



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. 1000 IU/L
Initial HCG levels < 1000 IU/l & subsequent levels are falling.
1577. Outcomes of occipito posterior
      position?
 a) Deep transverse arrest

 b) Occipito sacral arrest

 c) Face to pubis delivery

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - D
Ans, D. All of the above
1578. RMP can perform MTP in first trimester
      if he has assisted in MTPs -
 a) 5

 b) 15

 c) 25

 d) 50



Correct Answer - C
Ans, C. 25
A registered medical practitioner shall have one or more of the
following experience or training in gynecology and obstetrics namely
=
If he has assisted a registered medical practitioner in the
performance of twenty-five cases of medical termination
ofpregnancy of which at least five have been performed
independently,
1579. Crying of fetus in utero is called as ?
a) Vagitus uterinus

b) First cry

c) Utero vaginalis

d) Vagitus vagina



Correct Answer - A
Ans, A. Vagitus uterinus
1580. True about cephalhematoma is :
 a) Crosses the suture lines

 b) Always present at birth

 c) Ventouse delivery is a risk factor

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Ventouse delivery is a risk factor
The usual causes of a cephalohematoma are a prolonged second
stage of labor or instrumental delivery,particularly ventouse.
1581. Inner cell mass differentiates into ?
 a) Chorion

 b) Trophoectoderm

 c) Embryo

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - C
ANs. C. Embryo
Blastocyst enlarges & the zonapellucida undergoes lysis , this is
called zona hatching.
The cells on the outer side become trohoectoderm which
differentiates into chorion.
The cells on the inner side form inner cell mass which differentiates
into embrvo.
1582. Embryo is called "fetus" after how
      many weeks post
      fertilization/conception ?
 a) 6

 b) 8

 c) 10

 d) 12



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. 8
Embryonic period begins at 3rd week following ovulation/fertilization
& extends upto 8 weeks post conception (10 weeks from LMP).
Fetal period begins after 8 weeks post conception (10 weeks from
LMP) & ends in delivery.
1583. Utero-placental circulation is
      established days after fertilization ?
 a) 5

 b) 10

 c) 15

 d) 20



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. 10
The uteroPlacental circulation is established 9-10 days after
fertilization.
Fetoplacental circulation is established 2l days post fertilization.
1584. Pregnancy is contraindicated in all of
      the following except -
a) Primary Pulmonary Hypertension

b) Eisenmenger's syndrome

c) Marfan's with aortic root dilation

d) WPW syndrome



Correct Answer - D
Ans, D. WPW syndrome
1585. Which heart disease has the worst
      prognosis/maximum mortality in
      pregnancy?
a) MS

b) AS

c) PDA

d) Eisenmenger's syndrome



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Eisenmenger's syndrome
1586. Ovarian cycle can be correlated with all
      except ?
 a) Endometrial sampling

 b) Vaginal cytology

 c) Blood hormonal levels

 d) Estrous cycle



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Estrous cycle
Estrous cycle does not occur in human beings.
1587. Endometrial biopsy to detect ovulation
      is done on which day of the menstual
      cycle ?
 a) Day 8-9

 b) Day 13-15

 c) Day 21-23

 d) Day 3-5



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Day 21-23
Endometrial Biopsy : Rarely done now a days for the purpose of
iletecting ovulation.
1588. The uterine blood flow at term is -
 a) 50 mL/min

 b) 100-150 mL/min

 c) 350-375 mL/min

 d) 500-750 mL/min



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. 500-750 mL/min
Uteroplacental blood flow increases progressively during pregnancy
and ranges from 5N)-800 mL/minat term.
1589. Godell's sign is ?
 a) Dusky hue of the vestibule

 b) Softening of the cervix

 c) Increased pulsations felt through the lateral fornices

 d) Regular and rhythmic contractions during bimanual examination



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Softening of the cervix
1590. In fetus, insulin production begin at
      weeks of gestation -
 a) 4-6

 b) 8-12

 c) 14-18

 d) 24-28



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. 8-12
Reaching 8 to 10 weeks into development, the pancreas starts
producing insulin, glucagon, somatostatin, and pancreatic
polypeptide.
1591. Limb bud appear at what weeks of
      gestation?
 a) 3

 b) 4

 c) 6

 d) 9



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. 4
The upper extremity is first discretely visible as a bulge or limb bud
that develops on the ventrolateral wall of the embryo on day 26 (4-
mm crown-to-rump length).
1592. Features of non severe/mild pre
      ecampsia are all ecxept​ -
a) Diastolic BP <100 mm Hg

b) Systolic BP< 160 mm Hg

c) Mild IUGR

d) No premonitory symptoms



Correct Answer - C
Ans., C. Mild IUGR
1593. FERNING is due to ?
 a) Estogen & sodium chloride

 b) Progesterone & sodium chloride

 c) HCG

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - A
Ans, A, Estogen & sodium chloride
Cervical mucus is relatively rich in sodium chloride when estrogen
(but not progesterone) is being produced.
1594. Second wave of trophoblastic invasion
      occurs at weeks of gestation?
 a) 8-11

 b) 10-12

 c) 12-15

 d) 16-20



Correct Answer - C
Ans, C. 12-15
The timing of the development of the uteroplacental vessels has
been described in waves, or stages, over the course of gestation.
The first wave occurs before 12 weeks post-fertilization and consists
ofinvasion and modification of the spiral arteries of the decidua.
Between 12 and 16 weeks pos-fertilization, the second wore occurs.
This involves invasion of the intramyometrial parts of the spiral
arteries, converting narrow lumen, muscular spiral arteries into
dilated, low-resistance uteroplacental vessels.
1595. Abstinence period before semen
      analysis is ?
 a) 1-2 days

 b) 3-5 days

 c) 5-7 days

 d) 7-9 days



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. 3-5 days
The ideal specimen for examination is after 3-5 days of abstinence.
1596. Engaging diameter in face presentation
      is -
a) Suboccipitobregmatic

b) Mentovertical

c) Submentobregmatic

d) Occipitofrontal



Correct Answer - C
ANs, C. Submentobregmatic
1597. Least likely to cause dysmenorrhea -
a) Endometriosis

b) Adenomyosis

c) Uterine polyp

d) Cervical polyp



Correct Answer - D
Ans, D. Cervical polyp
1598. LH surge is due to ?
 a) Progesterone

 b) Estrogen

 c) AMH

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - B
Ans, B. Estrogen
3-4 days before the ovulation, estrogen level crosses a certain limit
(threshold level).
1599. Menopause is defined as ?
 a) Presence of hot flushes

 b) Cessation of menses for 1 year

 c) Cessation of menses for 6 months

 d) Cessation of menses for 2 years



Correct Answer - B
Ans, B. Cessation of menses for 1 year
Menopause is defined as the permanent cessation of menses for 7
year and is physiologically correlated with the decline in estrogen
secretion resulting from the loss offollicular/ovarian function.
1600. Symptoms of menopause are all except
      ?
 a) Hot flushes

 b) Night sweats

 c) Decrease libido

 d) Intermittent hypotension



Correct Answer - D
Ans, D. Intermittent hypotension
Hot flushes
The classic symPtom associated with estrogen deficiency is the hot
flash, also known as hot flush
This symptom is described as 'recurrent, transient periods of
flushing, sweating and a sensation ofheat, often accompanied by
palpations, feeling of anxiety and sometimes followed by chills".
1601. MENOPAUSE is diagnosed by ?
 a) Estradiol <20 pg/ml

 b) Progesterone <40 ng/dl

 c) FSH>40 IU/L

 d) LH > 20 IU/L



Correct Answer - C
Ans, C. FSH>40 IU/L
As per the American Association of clinical Endocrinologists, the
diagnosis of menopause is confirmed by FSH levels >40 IU/L.
1602. The velocity of sperm is ?
 a) 1-2 cm/hr

 b) 2-4 cm/min

 c) 1-4 mm/min

 d) 1-4 mm/hr



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. 1-4 mm/min
The velocity of a sperm in fluid medium is usually 1-4 mm/min.
This allows the sperm to move towards an ovum in order to fertilize
it.
1603. After ejaculation semen liquefies in ?
 a) 10 minutes

 b) 30 minutes

 c) 75 minutes

 d) 120 minutes



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. 30 minutes
Following ejaculation, the semen forms a gel which provides
protection for the sperm from the acidic environment of the vagina.
The gelisliquefied within 20-30 minute by enzymes from the prostate
gland.
1604. During pregnancy, true statement about
      CVS is ?
 a) Cardiac output decreases

 b) Right axis deviation

 c) Increase in left ventricular end diastolic diameter

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - C
Ans, C. Increase in left ventricular end diastolic diameter
2D echo: Increase in left ventricular end diastolic diameter.
Increase in left and right atrial diameters.
1605. MC site of implantation is ?
 a) Fallopian tube amullary part

 b) Fallopian tube isthmus

 c) Fundus of uterus

 d) Cornu of uterus



Correct Answer - C
Ans, C. Fundus of uterus
Implantation occurs in the endometrium on the anterior or posterior
wall of the body near the fundus on the sixth day following
fertilization (corresponding to the 20th day of the menstrual cycle).
1606. Alpha subunit of hCG is similar to ?
 a) FSH

 b) LH

 c) TSH

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - D
Ans, D. All of the above
Human chorionic Gonadotropin (hcG) isstructurallyrelated to three
other glycoproteinhormones LH, FSH, and TSH.
1607. Placental hormone with highest
      carbohydrate content is -
a) HCG

b) Human pregnancy specific beta glycoprotein

c) HPL

d) Relaxin



Correct Answer - A
Ans, A. HCG
HCGhas the highest carbohydrate content of any human hormone-
30%.
1608. The pelvic inlet usually is considered to
            be contracted if its shortest
       anteroposterior diameter is less than -
 a) 12 cm

 b) 10 cm

 c) 8 cm

 d) 14 cm



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. 10 cm
The pelvic inlet usually is considered to be contracted if its shortest
anteroposteriordiameter is less than10 cmor if the greatest
transverse diameter isless than12 cm
1609. Azoospermia with normal FSH would
      indicate ?
a) Hypothalamic failure

b) Testicular failure

c) Obstruction of vas defrens

d) All of the above



Correct Answer - C
Ans, C, Obstruction of vas defrens
1610. Causes of male infertility ?
 a) Idiopathic

 b) Varicocele

 c) Yq 11 micro deletion

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - D
Ans, D. All of the above
1611. Fetal thyroid gland is able to synthesize
      hormones by weeks of gestation ?
 a) 6-7

 b) 7-8

 c) 10-12

 d) 12-14



Correct Answer - C
Ans, C. 10-12
Fetal thyroidglandisabletosynthesizehormonesby 10-12
weeksofgestation.
1612. Poor prognosis in first trimester USG is
      ?
 a) No fetal pole at 5 weeks

 b) No cardiac activity at 5 weeks

 c) No gestational sac at 4 weeks

 d) No cardiac activity at 8 weeks of gestation



Correct Answer - D
Ans, D. No cardiac activity at 8 weeks of gestation
Absence of embryo with heartbeat 22 weeks after a scan that
showed a gestational sac without a yolk sac
1613. All are true about post partum
      depression except -
a) Symptoms resolve in 10-12 days

b) Affects both sexes

c) SSRIs are effective

d) None of the above



Correct Answer - A
Ans, A. Symptoms resolve in 10-12 days
1614. Nerve injured in McRoberts maneuver is
      ?
 a) Lumbosacral trunk

 b) Obturator nerve

 c) Femoral nerve

 d) Pudendal nerve



Correct Answer - C
Ans, C. Femoral nerve
McRoberts maneuver is to be done in cases of shoulder dystocia.
When the maternal thighs are markedly flexed and abducted,
pressure from the overlying inguinal iigament may lead to femoral
nerve injury.
1615. Most conclusive clinical sign of
      pregnancy is ?
 a) Uterine enlargement

 b) Cervical softening

 c) Amenorrhea

 d) Fetal heat sound auscultation



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Fetal heat sound auscultation
FHS auscultation is the most conclusive clinical sign of pregnancy.
1616. CRL when cardiac activity can be
      detected earliest by TVS -
 a) 1-4mm

 b) 1 cm

 c) 6-7mm

 d) 2-4 cm



Correct Answer - A
Ans, A. 1-4mm
Fetal heart beat can be detected as early as just under 6 weeks
gestation on good quality, high frequency transvaginalultrasound, as
a crown rump length (CRL) of as little as 1-2 mm.
1617. Kamla, 30 years old, P2L2 with 3.2 x 4.1
      cm fibroid uterus, complains of
      menorrhagia and is on symptomatic
      treatment since 6 months. The patient
      refuses surgery. Next line of
      management is ?
 a) GnRH analogs

 b) Danazol

 c) Myomectomy

 d) Uterine artery embolization



Correct Answer - D
Ans, D. Uterine artery embolization
UAE can be used as a therapy for symptomatic patients who refuse
or want to avoid surgery.
After embolization, there is 60-65% decrease in size of fibroids over
a period of 6-9 months, and so the patient's symPtoms may
decrease or disaPPear.
If the patient is still symptomatic after 1 year, then surgery should be
considered.
1618. Living ligature of the uterus is ?
 a) Endometrium

 b) Middle layer of myometrium

 c) Inner layer of myometrium

 d) Parametrium



Correct Answer - B
Ans, B. Middle layer of myometrium
Middle crisscross fibres act as living ligature during involution of the
uterus and prevent blood loss.
1619. In partograms recommended by 'WHO'
      the distance between the alert and
      action lines is ?
 a) 1 hour

 b) 2 hours

 c) 4 hours

 d) 5 hours



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. 4 hours
The concept of alert line' and ‘action line’ was introduced by Philpott
and Castle in 1972.
The action line can be placed at 2 – 4 hours interval to the right and
parallel to alert line.
In partograms recommended by'WH0'the distancebetween the alert
and action lines is 4 hours.
1620. Surgical excision of corpus luteum
      before weeks of gestation, results in
      miscarriage
 a) 6-7

 b) 9-11

 c) 11-12

 d) 12-14



Correct Answer - A
Ans, A, 6-7
Surgical excision of corpus luteum (luteoctomy) before 7 weeks of
gestation, uniformly precipitated an abrupt decrease in serum
progesterone concentration followed by miscarriage
1621. Factors responsible for development of
      OHSS include ?
 a) Histamine

 b) Cytokines

 c) Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - D
Ans, D. All of the above
VEGF is considered to be the most important.
1622. MVA syringe is used for ?
 a) First trimester MTP

 b) 2nd trimester MTP

 c) Vacuum delivery

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - A
Ans, A, First trimester MTP
Manual vacuum aspiration (MvA) is a safe and effective method of
abortion that involves evacuation of the uterine contents by the use
of a hand-held plastic aspirator.
It is appropriate for treatment of incomplete abortion for uterine sizes
up to 12 weeks from the last menstrual period (including
miscarriage, spontaneous abortion and removal of retained products
from an induced abortion), first-trimester MTP and endometrial
biopsy.
1623. Diihrssen incision is taken on -
 a) Fallopian tube

 b) Ovary

 c) Incompletely dilated cervix

 d) Fully dilated cervix



Correct Answer - C
Ans, C, Incompletely dilated cervix
Occasionalln especially with small preterm fetuses, the incompletely
dilated cervix will not allow vaginal delivery of the after-coming head
ofthe breech.
In such cases, Duhrssen incisions are usually necessary (cut the
cervix at l0 and 2 o'clock positions).
1624. A 27-year-old female with placenta
      previa had severe bleeding. What is the
      most likely outcome post delivery?
 a) Galactorrhea

 b) Diabetes

 c) Absence of menstrual cycle

 d) Cushing syndrome



Correct Answer - C
Ans. c. Absence of menstrual cycle
Sheehan syndrome, also known as postpartum hypopituitarism or
postpartum pituitary necrosis, is hypopituitarism caused by necrosis
due to blood loss and hypovolemic shock during and after childbirth.
Most common initial symptoms of Sheehan syndrome are
agalactorrhea (absence of lactation) under difficulties with lactation.
Many women also report amenorrhea or oligomenorrhea after
delivery.
1625. Woman has 100 ml blood loss every 30
      days. This is called as ?
 a) Menorrhagia

 b) Polymenorrhea

 c) Hypomenorrhea

 d) Normal menses



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Menorrhagia
Normal blood loss during menses is around 35 ml (20-80 ml)
Blood loss more than 80 ml is menorrhagia
1626. Menometrorrhagia is ?
a) Heavy periods

b) Intermenstrual bleeding

c) Heavy & irregular bleeding

d) Uterine bleeding occurring at regular intervals of less than 21
   days



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Heavy & irregular bleeding
1627. Prevalence of breech presentation at
      full term is ?
 a) 10%

 b) 6-7%

 c) 3-4%

 d) 1-2%



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. 3-4%
1628. The shortest conjugate is ?
 a) True conjugate

 b) Obstetric conjugate

 c) Diagonal conjugate

 d) Anatomical conjugate



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Obstetric conjugate
Obstetric conjugate (10 cm)
Distance between midpoint of sacral Promontory to the prominent
bony projection in the midline on inner surface of symphysis pubis.
1629. Shortest transverse diameter is ?
 a) BPD

 b) Bitemporal diameter

 c) Bimastoid diameter

 d) All are equal in length



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Bimastoid diameter
Bimastoid diameter = 7.5 cm
Occipitofrontal diameter → 11.5 cm
1630. With reference to fetal heart rate, a
      nonstress test is considered reactive
      when?
 a) Two fetal heart rate accelerations are noted in 20 minutes

 b) One fetal heart rate acceleration is noted in 20 minutes

 c) Two fetal heart rate accelerations are noted in 10 minutes

 d) Three fetal heart rate accelerations are noted in 30 minutes



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Two fetal heart rate accelerations are noted in 20
minutes
Reactive (Reassuring) NST
Two or more accelerations of > 15 beats/minute above the baseline,
lasting for > 75 seconds arc present in 20-4O minutes observation
period.
1631. Variable deceleration is seen in ?
 a) Head compression

 b) Uteroplacental insufficiency

 c) Cord compression

 d) None of the above



Correct Answer - C
Ans, C. Cord compression
Variable decelerations are due to cord compression
(oligohydramnios in labor)
1632. Modified BIOPHYSICAL PROFILE is ?
a) NST + FETAL TONE

b) FETAL TONE + AFI

c) NST + AFI

d) NST+ FETAL TONE + AFI



Correct Answer - C
Ans, C. NST + AFI
Modified BPP = NST &AFI
BPP has 5 components
1633. If fetus is having hypoxia, which of the
      BPP parameter will be affected last ?
 a) Fetal tone

 b) Fetal breathing movement

 c) Fetal movements

 d) NST



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Fetal tone
First activity to appear, Fetal Tone at about 7.5-8.5 weeks, is also
presumably the last activity to disappear with progressively
worsening hypoxia.
1634. Test used to detect genetic abnormality
       in embryo,before transferring it to the
                 uterus in IVF is ?
 a) Embryo cell biopsy

 b) CVS

 c) ICSI

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - A
 Ans, A. Embryo cell biopsy
PGD, involves removing a cell from an IVF embryo to test it for a
specific genetic condition (cystic fibrosis' for example) before
transferring the embryo to the uterus.
1635. In IVF, embryos are transferred back to
      uterine cavity at cells stage ?
 a) 2

 b) 2-4

 c) 4-8

 d) 8-16



Correct Answer - C
Ans, C. 4-8
Typically embryos ate transferred at the cleavage stage (Day 2 or 3
after oocyte retrieval).
Day three embryos ate called cleavage stage embryos and have
approximately 4 - 8 cells.
1636. Azoospermic patient can be a father of
      a child, by which of the following?
 a) IUI

 b) ZIFT

 c) ICSI

 d) Not possible & counsel regarding adoption



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. ICSI
PESA= percutaneous epididymalsperm aspiration
MESA= microscopic epididymal sperm aspiration
TESA= testicular sperm asPiration
TESE= testicular sperm extraction (testicular biopsy)
1637. A primigravida with 36 weeks of
      pregnancy is in labor with 3 cm
      dilatation and minimal uterine
      contraction. On rupture of membranes,
      fresh bleeding is noted with late fetal
      deceleration up to 50 beats/min. The
      patient was taken for LSCS but fetus
      could no be saved. No abruptio or
      placenta previa was seen. The likely
      diagnosis is ?
 a) Placenta previa

 b) Revealed abruptio

 c) Circumvallate placenta

 d) Vasa previa



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Vasa previa
Vasa previa ( l:2500) is a rare condition in which fetal blood vessels
are in front of the presenting part and cross the cervix.
The condition has a high fetal mortality rate (50-95%). This is
attributed to rapid fetal exsanguination, resulting from the vessels
tearing when the cervix dilates, membrane ruPture.
1638. All are components of Active
      Management of the Third Stage of
      Labor except ?
 a) Uterotonic agent within 1 minute of birth

 b) Massage of uterus before control cord traction

 c) Control cord traction

 d) None of the above



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Massage of uterus before control cord traction
Administer anuterotonic drug at the delivery of the anterior shoulder
or afterwards, within one minute of the baby's birth.
Before performing AMTSL, gently palpate the woman's abdomen to
rule out the presence of another baby. At this point, do not massage
the uterus.
Perform controlled cord traction
Massage the uterus immediately
1639. With which of the following events, the
      feto maternal haemorrhage risk is the
      least ?
 a) Amniocentesis

 b) Cordocentrsis

 c) Chorionic villus sampling

 d) Abruption



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Abruption
1640. Infertility is defined as ?
 a) Inability to conceive after 1 year of regular unprotected
    intercourse

 b) Inability to conceive after 1 year of marriage

 c) Inability to conceive after 2 years of marriage

 d) Inability to conceive in spite of 2 years of regular unprotected
    intercourse



Correct Answer - A
ANS. A. Inability to conceive after 1 year of regular unprotected
intercourse
Infertility is defined as an inability to conceive in spite of 1 year of
regular unprotected intercourse
1641. Cord prolapse is least likely with -
 a) Transverse lie

 b) Footling breech

 c) Oligohydroamnios

 d) Floating head



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Oligohydroamnios
Cord prolapse has been defined as the descent of the umbilical cord
through the cervix alongside (occult) or past the presenting part
(overt) in the vagina or outside the vulva in the presence of ruptured
membranes
1642. Ideal time to do Glucose challenge test
                  in pregnancy is ?
 a) 12-16 weeks

 b) 20-24 weeks

 c) 24-28 weeks

 d) 30-34 weeks



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. 24-28 weeks
O'sullivan Blood Sugar Screening Test (Glucose Challenge Test)
The ideal time to do this test is24-28 weeks of gestation (as insulin
resistance in pregnancy is maximum at 28 weeks of gestation)
1643. After IUFD, when does the mother
      develop DIC -
 a) 48 hours

 b) 1-2 weeks

 c) 3-4 weeks

 d) 6 weeks



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. 3-4 weeks
Thromboplastin from the dead fetus can enter the maternal system
and cause DIC.
This only happens when the dead fetus is retained inside for 3-4
weeks.
1644. Folic acid required in first trimester of
      normal pregnancy -
 a) 100 microgram

 b) 400-500 microgram

 c) 4 mg

 d) 5 mg



Correct Answer - B
Ans, B, 400-500 microgram
Some NTDs are associated with a specific mutation in the
methylene tetrahydrofolatereductase gene, the adverse effects of
whichcan be largely overcome by periconceptional folic acid
supplementation.
More than half of NTDs could be prevented with daily intake of 400
microgram of folic acid throughout the periconceptional period.
A woman with a prior pregnancy complicated by a neural tube defect
can reduce the 23% recurrence risk by more than 70% if she takes 4
mg of folic acid for the month before conception and for the first
trimester of pregnancy.
1645. A 30-year-old is 14 weeks pregnant. She
      had two painless deliveries at 16 weeks
      earlier. Next line of management is ?
 a) Cervical encerclage

 b) Evaluation for diabetes mellitus and thyroid disorders

 c) Cervical length assessment

 d) Tocolytics



Correct Answer - C
Ans, C. Cervical length assessment
The patient had two painless abortions at 16 weeks in the past, so
mostly it is a case of incompetent os.
Next line of management in these patients is frequent cervical length
assessment: clinically or by USG.
The patient is evaluated more frequently and if the cervix is short
(less than 2.5cm) than cervical encerclage has to be done.
Cervical encerclage is the surgery ofchoice for incompetent os, but
the surgery itselfcan lead to complications such as uterine
contractions, abortions, and PROM.
So the surgery is only to be done if it is indicated.
1646. Upper two -third anterior vaginal wall
      prolapse is ?
 a) Cystocele

 b) Urethrocele

 c) Rectocele

 d) Enterocele



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Cystocele
1647. Earliest sign after IUFD is ?
 a) Overlapping of skull bones

 b) Hyperflexion of spine

 c) Gas in great vessel

 d) Over crowding of ribs



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Gas in great vessel
Robert sign (gas in great vessels) - 12hrs after death.
1648. True about Gartners cyst is ?
a) Retention cyst in remnants of Wolffian duct

b) Arises from mullerian duct

c) Commonly arises from cervix

d) Impulse on coughing



Correct Answer - A
Ans, A. Retention cyst in remnants of Wolffian duct
1649. If the anal spincter is injured, it is which
      degree of Perineal Tear ?
 a) First

 b) Second

 c) Third

 d) Fourth



Correct Answer - C
Ans, C. Third
Perineal Tears are classified into four categories
First-degree tear: laceration is limited to the fourchette and
superficial perineal skin or vaginal mucosa.
Second-degree tear: laceration extends beyond fourchette,
perinealskin and vaginal mucosa to perineal muscles and fascia, but
not the anal sphincter.
Third-degree tear: fourchette, perineal skin, vaginal mucosa,
muscles, and anal sphincter are torn
1650. If the rectal mucosa is injured, it is
      which degree of Perineal Tear ?
 a) First

 b) Second

 c) Third

 d) Fourth



Correct Answer - D
Ans, D. Fourth
Rectal mucosal tear is fourth degree tear.
1651. Cryptomenorrhea occurs in ?
 a) Fibroids

 b) PCOS

 c) Imperforate hymen

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - C
Ans, C. Imperforate hymen
Congenital
Imperforate hymen: It is due to failure of disintegration of the central
cells of Mullerian eminence that project into urogenital sinus
TransversevaginalsePtum
Atresia ofvagina, cervix.
1652. Best indicator for ovarian reserve is ?
 a) AMH

 b) LH/FSH ratio

 c) FSH

 d) Estradiol



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. AMH
AMH blood levels are thought to reflect the size of the remaining egg
supply or “ovarian reserve"
1653. HPL has activity similar to which
      hormone ?
 a) Oxytocin

 b) Growth hormone

 c) Insulin

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Growth hormone
Human placenta lactogen (hPL) was named so, because of its
potent lactogenic & growth hormone like bioactivity as well as
immunochemical resemblance to human growth hormone'
1654. Which of the following is not a soft
      tissue marker of Down syndrome on
      USG ?
a) Increase NT

b) Absent nasal bone

c) Exomphalos

d) Polydactyly



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Polydactyly
1655. In a case of recurrent spontaneous
      abortion the following investigation is
      unwanted ?
 a) Hysteroscopy

 b) Testing for antiphospholipid antibodies

 c) Testing for TORCH infections

 d) Thyroid function tests



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Testing for TORCH infections
Testingfor TORCH infections is now thought to be unwarranted.
1656. Dilatation & evacuation is done for all
      ecxept ?
 a) Inevitable abortion

 b) Incomplete abortion

 c) Threatened abortion

 d) None of the above



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Threatened abortion
Inevitable abortion means the process ofexpulsion ofproducts
ofconception has become irreversible. The expulsion of products of
conception has not occurred but it is bound to happen and nothing
can be done to stop this process.
When the entire products are not expelled, part of it is left inside the
uterine cavity, it is called incomplete abortion.
1657. WHO normal Hb value for a non
      pregnant adult female is ?
 a) 10 gm/di

 b) 11 gm /dl

 c) 12 gm/dl

 d) 13 gm/dl



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. 12 gm/dl
1658. Which of the following epidermal layer
      is dead layer?
 a) Stratum basale

 b) Stratum spinosum

 c) Stratum corneum

 d) Stratum granulosum



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Stratum corneum
Stratum corneum (Horny layer):
This is the most superficial layer of epidermis and skin.
Cells are fully keratinized and end up as anucleate dead cells.
Therefore, stratum corneum is dead layer.
Stratum corneum is last to develop 4 Therefore in premature
newborn it is absent.
1659. Langerhans cell are seen in which layer
      of skin?
 a) Stratum basal

 b) Stratum carneum

 c) Stratum granulosum

 d) Stratum spinosum



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Stratum spinosum
[Ref Venkataram 151/e p. 2]
Langerhans cells
These cells are found in stratum spinosum and function as
epidermal macrophages (Antigen presenting cells).
These cells contain characteristic tennis racquet shaped granules
(Birbeck granules).
1660. Increase in the thickness of the prickle
      cell layer of the epidermis is called?
 a) Spongiosis

 b) Acanthosis

 c) Hypergranulosis

 d) Hyperkeratosis



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Acanthosis
[Ref Rook's 7th/e p. 7.36]
Important terminology related to epidermal layers
Separation of keratinocytes due to loss of intracellular bridges -
Acantholysis
Intracellular edema of keratinocytes Ballooning
1661. Substance common in skin and hair is?
 a) Keratin

 b) Laminin

 c) Nectin

 d) Vimentin



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Keratin
[Ref: IADVL 3rd /e p. 12]
Keratin is a family of fibrous structural proteins.
Keratin is the protein that protects epithelial cells from damage or
stress.
Keratin is the key component of our skin, hair and nails.
Its protein building blocks have amino acid chains, coiled, cross-
linked and classified as either hard or soft.
1662. Which of the following is a melanising
      agent?
 a) Methoxsalen

 b) Dapsone

 c) Minocycline

 d) Kojic acid



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Methoxsalen
[Ref Internet & IADVL 3'/e p. 756]
Melanizing agents are drugs that increase sensitivity to solar
radiation and promote re-pigmentation of de-pigmented areas of
skin.
Melanizing agents sensitize the skin to sunlight. As a result,
erythema, inflammation and pigmentation occurs.
1663. Fordyce spots involve?
 a) Penis

 b) Tongue

 c) Fingers

 d) Nails



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Penis
[Ref IADVL 3"1/e p. 1779]
Fordyce spots (Fordyce granules or Fordyce disease):
Fordyce's spot represents ectopic sebaceous glands on lips (most
common site) and oral mucosa.
They may also appear on vulva and penis, where they are called
Tyson's gland, i.e., ectopic sebaceous gland at penis (prepuce) and
vulva is called tyson's gland.
These glands have histopathology similar to normal sebaceous
glands, despite their ectopic location.
1664. Most common etiology of erythema
      multiforme is?
 a) Idiopathic

 b) Drugs

 c) HSV

 d) TB



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Idiopathic
[Ref: Neena Khanna Yale p. 61, 63]
Erythema multiforme
Most of the cases of erythema multiforme are idiopathic, but
amongst the causative agents Herpes simplex virus is the most
important cause.
Erythema multiforme is an acute, often self limited erutption
characterized by a distinctive clinical eruption, the hallmark of which
is the Target lesion (Iris lesion or Bulle's eye lesion).
1665. Hypopigmented macules are found in?
 a) Addison's disease

 b) Porphyria

 c) Cutaneous mastocytosis

 d) Tuberous sclerosis



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Tuberous sclerosis
[Ref Rook's 7th/e p. 17.37-17, 39.58-39.59; Behl 10thie p. 154]
Causes of localized hypopigmentation (Macule/Patch):
Primary Cutaneous disorders:
Vitiligo
Pityriasis versicolor
Pityriasis alba
Postinflammatory
Nevus depigmentosus (achromicus)
Nevus anemicus
Piebaldism
Chemical leukoderma
Idiopathic guttate Hypomelanosis
Systemic diseases:
Scleroderma
Tuberous sclerosis
Sarcoidosis
Cutaneous T-cell lymphoma
Leprosy (tuberculoid & Indeterminate)
Onchocerciasis
Hypomelanosis of Ito
Incontinetia pigmenti (Stage IV)
Vogt - Koyangi - Harada disease
1666. Which of the following disease is
      closely related to enetropathy?
 a) Linear Ig A disease

 b) Pemphigus foliaceous

 c) Dermatitis herpetiformis

 d) Erythema multiforme



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Dermatitis herpetiformis
[Ref: Behl 10m/e p. 293]
Dermatitis herpetiformis is a disease of the skin caused by the
deposition of IgA in papillary dermis and along the epidermal
basement membrane zone (Dermoepidermal junction).
Almost all patients of dermatitis herpetiformis have an associated
gluten sensitive enteropathy.
1667. Residual Hypopigmentation following a
      drug reaction, is best known as?
 a) Vitiligo

 b) Chemical leukoderma

 c) Post inflammatory hypomelanosis

 d) Piebaldism



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Post inflammatory hypomelanosis
[Ref IADVL 3"1/e p. 747-748]
Among given options, postinflammatory hypomelanosis is the best
answer.
understand let us have a look at the definition few important terms.
Vitiligo is also an acquired condition with loss of pigmentation but
most cases are idiopathic.
It is mainly considered to be an autoimmune condition.
Precipitated by hormonal changes, acute emotional trauma or stress
or any condition leading to immune imbalance.
So, any hypomelanosis resulting after inflammation is known as post
inflammatory hypomelanosis (including leucoderma).
Sometimes both the terms are used synonymously.
Whereas the term 'chemical leucoderma' is used only when there
repeated exposure (contact) to some specific chemical.
Therefore among given options, postinflammatory hypomelanosis is
the best answer as drug reaction is an inflammatory condition
leading to residual hypopigmentation.
1668. Most common pattern of
      onychomycosis is?
 a) Distal and lateral subungual

 b) Proximal subungual

 c) White superficial

 d) Total dystrophic



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Distal and lateral subungual
[Ref IADVL 3fli/e p. 266]
Distal and lateral subungual:
DSO is the most common form (90%) of onychomycosis.
Characterized by invasion of the nail bed and underside of the nail
plate beginning at the hyponychium and migrates proximally through
the underlying nail matrix
DSO is usually caused by the dermatophyte T. rubrum.
Infection of the toenails being much more common than infection of
the fingernails
   1669. Which of the following is not a feature
         of dermatomyositis?
    a) 'V' sign

    b) Holster sign

    c) Pokiloderma

    d) Groove sign



   Correct Answer - D
   Ans. D. Groove sign
   [Ref: Rooks 7th/e p. 127-38; IADVL 3'/e p. 1236]
   Groove sign (a depression along the course of a vein or between
   muscle groups) is seen in deep morphea.
   Cutaneous signs od dermatomyositis
1. Gottron's papules : lilac or violaceous papules on knuckles and
   dorsa of hands
2. Gottron's sign : violaceous erythema with edema over shoulders,
   arms and forearms
3. Heliotrope sign : violaceous erythema with edema over eyelids,
   periorbital region
4. Poikiloderma : atrophy of skin, hypopigmentation, dialalted blood
   vessels over trunk
5. Mechanic hand : symmetrical hyperkeratosis on ulnar aspect of
   thumb and radial aspect of fingers
6. Shawl sign : violaceous erythema extending from dorsolateral
   aspect of hands, forearms and arms to shoulders and neck.
7. 'V' sign : violaceous erythema in a V shaped distribution over
   anterior neck and chest.
8. Holster sign : b/1 symmetrical, patchy macular violaceous erythema
   displayibg a reticuloid or levidoid array over the lateral aspect of
    upper thigh and hips.
 9. Calcinosis cutis : calcium deposits in skin (in juvenile variant)
10. Miscellaneous signs : Photosensitivity, vasculitis, panniculitis, Nail-
    fold telangiectasia
1670. Not a feature of candidal intertrigo is?
 a) Obesity is a risk factor

 b) C. albicans is the most common causative species

 c) Central scaling

 d) Satellite lesions



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Central scaling
[Ref Neena Khanna's 4th/e p. 294]
Candidal intertrigo
Infection of skin folds is called candidal intertrigo. It is characterized
by reddened (erythematous) plaques, with satellite pustules
(peripheral pustules). There may be fine scales at periphery.
Over the regions covered with thick stratum corneum, i.e., toe webs
and Finger webs, the lesion appear as moist, white colored plaques.
Virtually any body fold may be affected. Groins, axillae,
submammary folds in females, toes & finger webs are common sites
of affection.
Lesions persisting for a long time lead to the development of
superficial painful erosions that take a longer period to heal. This is
called "erythema of lacquer.
1671. Scaling is not feature of which of the
      following?
 a) Tinea

 b) Lichen planus

 c) Herpes zoster

 d) Reiter's disease



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Herpes zoster
[Ref Beh110th/e p. 254-268; Neena Khanna 3"Ye p. 37]
In herpes there is crusting but no scaling.
Papulo-squamous disorders have following two characteristics : -
Papule (solid elevated skin lesion < 1 cms) or plaques (solid
elevated lesion > 1 cm). ii) Scales (visible exfoliation of the skin
which represnts visible shedding of skin).
"Papulosquamous disorders manifest papules surmounted by
scales".
1672. A 40 years old male patient presents
      with multiple erythematous annular
      lesions with peripheral scales arranged
      predominantly on trunk. Treatment of
      choice is?
 a) Topical steroids

 b) Systemic steroids

 c) Systemic Azathioprine

 d) Topical antifungal



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Topical steroids
[Ref: Beh110`Ve p. 263]
Pityriasis rubra pilaris
Clinical presentation of the patient in question suggests the
diagnosis of PRP for which treatment of choice is topical steroids
and salicylic acid.
Treatment
Localized lesions - Topical corticosteroids + Keratolytics (Salicylic
acid, urea)
Erythroderma - Vitamin A, Acitretin (Retinoids), oral methotrexate.
1673. Woronoff's ring is a feature of?
 a) Psoriasis

 b) Lichen planus

 c) Pityriasis rosea

 d) Pemphigus



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Psoriasis
[Ref Rooks 7"Ve p. 35.1-35.63]
Clinical features of Psoriasis (psoriasis vulgaris)
Psoriasis occurs at all ages, most patients are young or middle aged
adults.
The typical lesion is nummular round plaque which has
following characteristic features:
Well defined
Profuse, silvery white, powdery scales (Candle drop scales) - Losely
adherent and easily drops.
Bright red erythmatous base.
Plaque is often surrounded by a hypopigmented halo Ring of
Woronoff.
1674. Most important factor in causation of
      Ingrown toe nail is?
 a) Fungal infection

 b) Ill fitting shoes

 c) Genetic predisposition

 d) Nutritional deficiency



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Ill fitting shoes
Ill-fitting shoes:
Ingrown toenail(unguis incarnates/ onychocryptosis)
It is a common painful condition in which the nail grows so that it
cuts into one or both sides of the paronychium or nail bed.
While ingrown nails can occur in the nails of both the hands and the
feet, they occur most commonly with the toenails.
Presents with pain, tenderness, redness and swelling along one or
both sides of the affected nail.
1675. Which of the following is not a feature
      of lichen planus?
 a) Pterygium

 b) Spontaneous healing

 c) Scarring alopecia

 d) Not premalignant



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Not premalignant
[Ref Behl/e p. 265; Rooks 7th /e p. 5.13]
Very rarely chronic ulcerative lesions may develop malignant
changes, i.e., squamous cell carcinoma. Clinical features of lichen
planus.
1676. Which of the following is not true for
      scabies?
 a) Wrist is common site in children

 b) Burrows are intradermal lesions

 c) Papules and pustules are due to hypersensitivity to mite

 d) Itching generalized



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Burrows are intradermal lesions
[Ref Behl 10th/e p. 179]
Burrow is the serpentine (S-shaped), thread like gray-brown line
which represent the intraepidermal tunnel created by the moving
female mite in stratum corneum.
Burrow is Pathognomic of scabies.
Burrows are difficult to demonstrate in infant.
Clinical features of scabies
1. Severe itching is the most prominent symptom, and has following
characteristic features :
Worse at night
Generalized
Affecting several family members
2. In Scabies, severe itching typically worsen at night, most notably
along the web spaces of fingers, wrists, elbows, axillae and groin
area - Areas know as circle of Hebra.
3. Papules and papulovesicles due to hypersensitivity to mite.
4. Pustules can occur due to secondary infection.
5. Excoriation and scratch marks.
6. History of involvement of family member
1677. Scabies is caused by?
 a) Mite

 b) Tic

 c) Virus

 d) Fungus



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Mite
[Ref Behl 10thie p. 179]
Scabies is an intensly pruritic skin infestation caused by Sarcoptes
scabiei, an acarus (mite).
Scabies usually affects children but can occur at any age.
More common in low socioeconomic strata as overcrowding and
poor hygiene facilitate transmission.
The most important means of transmission is via direct contact with
an infected individual.
Scabes is a water washed disease which occurs due to inadequate
use of water or improper hygiene.
   1678. Selenium sulphide is used in the
         treatment of?
    a) Scabies

    b) T. versicolor

    c) T. cruris

    d) Cutaneous leishmaniasis



   Correct Answer - B
   Ans. B. T. versicolor
   [Ref Harrison 17th/e p. 318]
   Selenium sulphide (2.5%) in detergent base is applied all over body
   below neck (sparing the genitalia), left overnight and washed of next
   morning.
   Two to three applications applied once or twice a week usually
   clears the infection.
   Treatment of P. versicolor
1. Systemic agents:- azoles such as ketoconazole, fluconazole or
   itraconazole.
2. Topical agents :
3. Azoles - clotrimazole, econazole, miconazole, ketoconazole.
4. Others - selenium sulfide(2.5%), sodium thiosulphate (20%) ,
   whitfield's ointment (3% Salicylic acid + 6% Benzoic acid), zinc
   pyrithione(1%), tolnaftate, ciclopirox olamine.
1679. First generation topical retinoid is?
 a) Retinoic acid

 b) Adapalene

 c) Tazarotene

 d) Acitretin



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Retinoic acid
[Ref Comprehensive dermatological drug therapy p. 254 & internet]
Retinoids
The retinoids comprise a class of chemical compounds that are
vitamers of vitamin A or are chemically related to it.
Retinoids have found use in medicine where they regulate epithelial
cell growth.
Retinoids have many important functions throughout the body
including roles in vision, regulation of cell proliferation and
differentiation, growth of bone tissue, immune function, and
activation of tumor suppressor genes.
1680. Treatment for impetigo includes all
      except?
 a) Topical mupirocin

 b) Systemic erythromycin

 c) Topical gentamycin

 d) Systemic cephalosporins



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Topical gentamycin
 [Ref IADVL 3rd/e p. 235]
* "Topical use of gentamycin should be avoided as gentamycin
resistance can develop and it can be transferred between different
species and strains of staphylococcus."
Treatment of impetigo
* Impetigo contagiosum
  - Localized 4 Topical antibiotics like fusidic acid or mupirocin
  - Extensive - Systemic antibiotics (erythromycin group to cover
staphylococcus and streptococcus).
  - If response is poor, oxacillin-Clavulanic acid or cephalexin can be
tried.
Bullous Impetigo
* Localized→ Topical fusidic acid or mupirocin
* Extensive 4 Systemic antistaphylococcal antibiotics (flucloxacillin,
amoxicillin- clavulanic acid, methicillin or erythromycin)
1681. Jock itch is caused by?
 a) Epidermophyton floccosum

 b) Candida albicans

 c) Trichophyton tonsurans

 d) Malassezia furfur



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Epidermophyton floccosum
[Ref Neena Khanna 3rd/e p. 242-244]
Tinea cruris (Jock itch):
It is also known as Dhobi's itch.
Tinea crusis is dermatophytic infection of the groin and adjacent
skin.
The classical appearance of tinea cruris is red (erythematous) scaly
lesion with clear centre.
Margins are well defined with raised borders.
Itching is very prominent.
The most common sites of involvement are genital area and medial
aspect of upper thigh (Most common site of dermatophytosis in
males).
T cruris usually affect young adult male.
In India trichophyton rubrum is the most common cause and in
western countries epidermophyton floccosum is the most common
cause.
1682. Resorcinol is used in the treatment of?
 a) Lichen planus

 b) Acne

 c) Vitiligo

 d) Scabies



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Acne
[Ref Contact and occupational dermatology p. 195]
Resorcinol is included in many antiseptic and keratolytic topical
medications.
Uses include psoriasis, hidradenitis suppurativa, eczema, acne,
seborrhea, corns, calluses, warts, and other skin disorders.
1683. Hertoghe's sign is seen in?
 a) Atopic dermatitis

 b) Cutaneous TB

 c) Lichen planus

 d) Psoriasis



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Atopic dermatitis
[Ref Indian Dermatol Online J. 2012 Sep-Dec; 3(3): 159-165.doi:
10.4103/2229-5178.101810]
The Sign of Hertoghe or Queen Anne's sign is a thinning or loss of
the outer third of the eyebrows (superciliary madarosis).
It is a classical sign of hypothyroidism or atopic dermatitis.
It can also be seen in leprosy, myxedema, follicular mucinosis,
trichotillomania, ectodermal dysplasia, discoid lupus erythematosus,
alopecia areata, syphilis, ulerythema ophryogenes, systemic
sclerosis and HIV infection.
1684. Preferred concentration of minoxidil for
      female androgenetic alopecia is?
 a) 2%

 b) 5%

 c) 8%

 d) 10%



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. 2%
[Ref IADVL 3'/e p. 891]
In female androgenic alopecia results are similar with 2% and 5%
minoxidil but side effects are more with 5% solution.
Whereas in males 5% is more efficacious.
Therefore in a female patient 2% minoxidil is preferred whereas in
males 5% solution is the preferred choice.
1685. Normal epidermal turnover time is?
 a) 1 week

 b) 2 weeks

 c) 3 weeks

 d) 4 weeks



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. 3 weeks
[Ref: Neena Khanna 3rd le p. 297; Roxburgh's 7th/e p. 62]
Treatment of scabies in children
Topical permethrin (5% cream) is a safe and effective scabicide in
children. It is recommended as a first-line therapy for patients older
than 2 months of age.
Because there are theoretical concerns regarding percutaneous
absorption of permethrin in infants younger than 2 months of age,
guidelines recommend 7% sulfur preparation instead of permethrin.
1686. Treatment of choice for scabies in an
      infant < 6 months is?
 a) BHC

 b) Ivermactin

 c) Permathrin

 d) Crotomiton



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Crotomiton
[Ref: Neena Khanna 3rdle p. 297]
Ivermectin is the only oral drug, available for scabies treatment.
1687. Oral treatment of choice for scabies is?
 a) Albendazole

 b) Itraconazole

 c) Sulphur

 d) Ivermactin



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Ivermactin
[Ref Behl 10th/e p. 406; Neena Khanna 3rd/e p. 50, 51]
Pityriasis rosea:
P. rosea is self limiting disease, subsides with 6-12 weeks.
P. rosea is a common scaly disorder, occuring usually in children
and young adults (10-35 years).
Characterized by round/oval pink brown patches with a superficial,
centrifugal scale, distributed over trunk in a Christmas tree pattern.
The exact etiology is not known, but it is considered to be a viral
disease;
Human Herpes virus 6 (HHV 6) and Human Herpes virus 7 (HHV 7)
may play a role.
1688. Pityriasis rosea clears with in?
 a) 1-2 weeks

 b) 2-4 weeks

 c) 4-8 weeks

 d) 6-12 weeks



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. 2-4 weeks
[Ref Behl 10th/e p. 406; Neena Khanna 3rd/e p. 50, 51]
Pityriasis rosea:
P. rosea is self limiting disease, subsides with 6-12 weeks.
P. rosea is a common scaly disorder, occuring usually in children
and young adults (10-35 years).
Characterized by round/oval pink brown patches with a superficial,
centrifugal scale, distributed over trunk in a Christmas tree pattern.
The exact etiology is not known, but it is considered to be a viral
disease; Human Herpes virus 6 (HHV 6) and Human Herpes virus 7
(HHV 7) may play a role.
Clinical manifestations of P. rosea:
The disease starts with an upper respiratory prodrome or a mild flu.
After 1-2 weeks, annular erythematous plaque appears on trunk that
is referred to as mother patch or herald patch.
Over the next 1-2 weeks, fresh patch appear all over the trunk, in a
Christmas tree configuration or Fir tree Configuration.
1689. A known case of diabetes develops
      annular orange skin lesions, which
      disappear after biopsy. This
      phenomenon is known as?
a) Koebner's phenomenon

b) Reverse Koebner's phenomenon

c) Asboe Henson sign

d) Isotopic phenomenon



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Reverse Koebner's phenomenon
[Ref
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/268343496_Proposed_
classification_for_koebner_wolf
isotopic_renbok_koebner_nonreaction_isotopic_nonreaction_other_relatedphenom
Annular orange skin lesions in a diabetic indicate towards granuloma
annulare.
There have been few reports of disappearance of lesions after
biopsy in granuloma annulare.
This phenomenon is known as reverse Koebner's phenomenon.
1690. Alopecia universalis is?
 a) Loss of all the scalp hair

 b) Loss of all body hair

 c) Loss hair at the scalp margin

 d) Male pattern hair loss



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Loss of all body hair
[Ref Fitzpatrick]
In alopecia aerata, when there is total loss of scalp hair it is called
Alopecia totalis.
When there is loss of total body hair it is referred as Alopecia
universalis.
Alopecia along the scalp margin is called ophiasis.
An inverse ophiasis pattern (sisaphio) is when it spares occipital
region and affects rest of the scalp.
1691. Treatment of choice for erytherodermic
      psoriasis is?
 a) Prednisolone

 b) Hydroxyurea

 c) Acitretin

 d) Ciclosporin



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Acitretin
[Ref: Neena Khanna 3rdle p. 46]
Methotrexate is the DOC for Erythrodermic psoriasis.
Acitretin is an alternative.
1692. Multiple psoriatic lesions on hands.
      Treatment of choice is?
 a) NBUVB

 b) Systemic methotrexate

 c) Topical steroids and salicylic acid

 d) Systemic steroids



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Topical steroids and salicylic acid
[Ref Neena Khanna 3rd le p. 46]
Preferred treatment for localized psoriasis is topical coal tar or short
contact, dithroanol.
Alternative is topical steroids + Salicylic acid.
1693. False about Langer's lines is?
 a) Remain constant throughout life time of a person

 b) Correspond to the collagen fibers in dermis

 c) Incision along these lines produces better scar

 d) Skin along these lines is least flexible



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Remain constant throughout life time of a person
[Ref: IADVL text book of dermatology 3rd le p. 175 & Internet]
Langer's lines
Also called cleavage lines, is a term used to define the direction
within the human skin along which the skin has the least flexibility.
These lines correspond to the alignment of collagen fibers within the
dermis.
Usually, a surgical cut is carried out in the direction of langer's lines,
and incisions made parallel to langer's lines generally heal better
and produce less scarring.
Directional changes of Langer's lines have been known to occur
within the course of a person's lifetime.
Sometimes the exact direction of these lines are unknown, because
in some regions of the body there are differences between different
individuals.
1694. Most common type of cutaneous
      mastocytosis is?
 a) Solitary mastocytoma

 b) Urticaria pigmentosa

 c) Telangiectasia macularis eruptiva perstans

 d) Diffuse erythrodermic



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Urticaria pigmentosa
[Ref IADVL text book of dermatology 3rde p. 146
Urticaria pigmentosa:
(Generalized eruption of cutaneous mastocytosis (childhood type).
It is the most common form of cutaneous mastocytosis.
Urticaria pigmentosa is most common in children.
It can also occur in adults.
It is a familial cutaneous disorder characterised by generalised
distribution of red brown macules.
Each lesion represents a collection of mast cells in the dermis with
hyperpigmentation of overlying epidermis.
The most characteristic features is that these lesions urticate on
scratching.
1695. Volcano sign is seen in?
 a) Leprosy

 b) Leishmaniasis

 c) Lupus vulgaris

 d) DLE



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Leishmaniasis
[Ref Indian Dermatol Online J. 2012 Sep-Dec; 3(3): 159-165.doi:
10.4103/2229-5178.101810]
Volcano sign:
Descriptive term for the morphologic feature of Old World cutaneous
leishmaniasis.
The lesion starts as a small nontender papule, which enlarges in
size and ulcerates in the centre.
The border of the crusted ulcer often has an erythematous rim and is
called as "Volcano sign".
1696. Treatment of choice for oral candidiasis
      is?
 a) Terbinafin

 b) Nystatin

 c) Griesofulvin

 d) Selenium sulphide



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Nystatin
[Ref IADVL 3rdle p 283]
Treatment of cutaneous candidiasis
Topical (TOC for uncomplicated cases): - nystatin suspension,
clotrimazole troches, gention violet, chlorhexidine, ketoocnazole,
amphotericin gel.
Systemic (reinfection, unresponsive & chronic cases): - oral
fluconazole, itraconazole or ketoconazole are needed.
   1697. Most common metal responsible for
         contact dermatitis is ?
    a) Gold

    b) Silver

    c) Nickel

    d) Mercury



   Correct Answer - C
   Ans. C. Nickel
   [Ref Andrew's diseases of skin E-book p 99 & IADVL 3rd/e p. 559]
   Contact dermatitis is mainly of two types :
   A. Irritant contact dermatitis
   Due to direct irritant action of the material e.g. Solvents, Alkalis,
   Detergents. Most common sites are hands & forearms.
   B. Allergic contact dermatitis
   It is due to delayed hypersensitivity (type IV hypersensitivity) to a
   particular antigen in a sensitized individual.
   The most common allergens causing allergic contact dermatitis
   are pollen and metals:
1. Parthenium (Congress grass)
2. Nickel
1698. Which of the following is true about
      xeroderma pigmentosa?
a) Autosomal dominant

b) Good long term prognosis

c) Purine dimmers

d) DNA repair defect



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. DNA repair defect
[Ref Rook's 4thie p. 78.12]
Xeroderma pigmentosa
Molecular defect:
Exposure to UV rays damages DNA due to production of convalent
linkages between adjacent pyrimidines (pyrimidine dimmers).
Normally the damaged DNA is repaired by excision and repair.
In xeroderma pigmentosa the repair of UV damaged DNA is
defective.
It is an autosomal recessive disorder.
1699. True about erythema toxicum is?
 a) Common in pre-term baby

 b) Lesions contain many lymphocytes

 c) Can be life threatening condition

 d) Occurs mainly in neonatal period



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Occurs mainly in neonatal period
[Ref IADVL .3rd le p. 163]
* Erythema toxicum neonatorum (ETN/baby acne/toxic erythema of
the newborn)
  - It is a benign, asymptomatic skin condition that is characterized
by small, erythematous papules, vesicles, and, occasionally,
pustules.
  - The lesions are usually surrounded by a distinctive diffuse,
blotchy, erythematous halo
  - It is more common in babies born at full term (between 37 and 40
weeks of gestation) compared with premature babies.
  - Only occurs during the neonatal period, usually between day 2-5
after birth and typically resolves within first two weeks of life.
  - The fluid from erythema toxicum lesions will show many
eosinophils
1700. Nevus simplex commonly presents at ?
 a) Face

 b) Trunk

 c) Legs

 d) Hand



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Face
[Ref IADVL 3rdie p. 201]
Nevus simplex (Nevus flammeus nuchae/stork bite/ Salmon patch)
It is a congenital capillary malformation presents in 30 percent of
newborn babies.
A stork bite is due to dilation of blood vessels and may become
darker when the child cries or strains.
They are most common on the forehead, eyelids, upper lip, between
the eyebrows, and the back of the neck, these marks fade as the
infant grows.
1701. In mechanical ventilation, peak
      pressure in inspiration denotes ?
 a) Compliance of lung

 b) Capacity of inspiratory muscles

 c) Airway resistance

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Airway resistance
[Ref: Essentials of anaesthesia-786]
Pressures in mechanical ventilation
Peak pressure
Peak pressure applies when there is airflow in the circuit, i.e., during
inspiration.
Peak pressure determines airway resistance.
1702. Propofol vial, once opened, should be
      used within?
 a) 2 hours

 b) 4 hours

 c) 6 hours

 d) 8 hours



Correct Answer - C
ANs. C. 6 hours
[Ref: Lee 13th/e p. 158-160; Morgan 4thle p. 200-202]
Propofol is oil based preparation containing soybean oil, egg lecithin,
and glycerol. The color of solution is milky white.
Solution should be used within 6 hours after opening the vial
because there have been death reports following the use of
contaminated solution as egg lecithin is a good medium for bacterial
growth.
To prevent this problem recently available propofol preparations
have disodium edetate or sodium metabisulfite as antimicrobial
agent.
1703. Relative contraindication of
      neuraxial/regional anesthesia is?
 a) Hypertension

 b) Renal disease

 c) Sepsis

 d) Diabetes



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Sepsis
[Ref Morgan 4th/e p. 299]
Contraindications to neuraxial block (spinal & epidural)
Absolute :- Infection at the site of injection, patient refusal,
coagulopathy or other bleeding disorder, severe hypovolemia,
increased ICT, severe aortic or mitral stenosis.
Relative :- Sepsis, unto-operative patient, pre-existing neurological
deficit, demyelinating lesions, severe spinal deformity, stenotic
valvular heart disease.
1704. CNS affection of a local anesthetic
      agent leads to?
 a) Convulsion

 b) Perioral numbness

 c) Depression

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. All of the above
[Ref Morgan 4thle p. 270]
Manifestations of local anesthetic toxicity
Early symptoms (Prodrome) Circumoral numbness, dizziness,
tongue paresthesia, restlesness, tinnitus, agitation.
CNS symptoms :- These are biphasic i.e. excitation (convulsions,
restlessness, agitation & tinnitus), followed by depression
(drowsiness, disorientation, respiratory depression,
unconciousness).
Cardiovascular manifestations :- hypotension, cardiac arrest, coma
1705. American anesthetic association says
      that clopidogrel should be withheld how
      many days before surgery?
 a) 1 day

 b) 1 week

 c) 3 weeks

 d) 4 weeks



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. 1 week
[Ref Ajay Yadav 3'/e p. 46]
Preoperative modifications of pre-existing drugs
                                    Drugs which can be continued
Drugs which can be stopped
                                               till the day of surgery
Conventional dose aspirin &
                                 Antianginal (except aspirin)
clopidogrel (antiplatelets)-I
week before surgery              Antiepileptics
Oral anticoagulants - 4 days
before & switch to heparin,      Antihypertensives (except AT-II
which is stopped 12 hours prior antagoists) Levodopa
to surgery
Oral hypoglycemic (metformin)
                                 Digitalis
- 48 hours before urgery
and switch to insulin            TCAs
AT-II antagonists (losartan,
                                 Low dose aspirin
valsarton) - 1 day prior
Lithium - 48-72 hours before
surgery
MAO inhibitors - 3 weeks
before surgery
Note: Antiplatelet drugs like clopidogrel and conventional dose of
aspirin should be stopped 7 days prior to surgery.
But low dose aspirin can be continued till the day of surgery.
1706. Which of the following inhalational
      anesthetic agent most easily crosses
      blood brain barrier?
 a) Methoxyflurane

 b) Sevoflurane

 c) Desflurane

 d) Nitrous oxide



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Methoxyflurane
[Ref Ajay Yadav 4th/e p. 63]
Oil : gas partition coefficient measures the lipid solubility of the agent
and therefore solubility in the fat-rich tissues of the CNS (ability to
cross BBB).
Methoxyflurane has maximum oil : Gas partition coefficient —> Most
lipid soluble & most easily crosses BBB.
1120 has minimum oil : Gas partition coefficient -p Least lipid soluble
& therefore likely to cross BBB.
1707. Which of the following anesthetic agent
      most is lipid soluble?
 a) Nitrous oxide

 b) Methoxyflurane

 c) Isoflurane

 d) Halothane



Correct Answer - B
Ans.B. Methoxyflurane
Oil : gas partition coefficient measures the lipid solubility of the agent
and therefore solubility in the fat-rich tissues of the CNS (ability to
cross BBB).
Methoxyflurane has maximum oil : Gas partition coefficient —> Most
lipid soluble & most easily crosses BBB.
1120 has minimum oil : Gas partition coefficient -p Least lipid soluble
& therefore likely to cross BBB.
1708. Etomidate is not used for long term
      infusion because?
 a) Results in adrenal suppression

 b) May cause vasospasm

 c) Results in cardiac arrhythmias

 d) May cause increase in ICT



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Results in adrenal suppression
[Ref Morgan 4th/e p. 200]
Etomidate suppresses corticosteroid synthesis in the adrenal cortex
by reversibly inhibiting 1113-hydroxylase, which coverts 11-
deoxycortisol to cortisol and by a relative minor effect on 17a -
hydroxylase.
Using a continuous etomidate infusion for sedation of critically ill
trauma patients in intensive care units has been associated with
increased mortality due to adrenal suppression.
The mortality of patients exposed to a continuous infusion of
etomidate for more than 5 days increased from 25% to 44%, mainly
due to infectious causes such as pneumonia.
1709. Among the following agents, maximum
      boiling point is associated with?
 a) Sevoflurane

 b) Isofurane

 c) Methoxyflurane

 d) Desflurane



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Methoxyflurane
[Ref Ajay Yadav 4th/e p. 63]
Boiling point of methoxyflurane is more than water (104°C)
1710. A patient with normal succinylcholine
      metabolism will have Dibucaine number
      between?
 a) 20-30

 b) 40-45

 c) 50-60

 d) 70-80



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. 70-80
Dibucain number : Dibucain (a local anaesthetic) inhibits 80% of
normal pseudocholinesterase and 20% of atypical (non-functional)
pseudocholinesterase. Therefore normal dibucain number is 70-
80%.
1711. Benzocaine is used in which type of
      anesthesia?
 a) Topical

 b) Spinal

 c) Epidural

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Topical
[Ref Morgan 4th/e p. 270]
Benzocaine and cocaine are used only in topical anesthesia .
1712. Succinylcholine is contraindicated in?
 a) Hyperkalemia

 b) Hypokalemia

 c) Hypercalcemia

 d) Hypocalcemia



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Hyperkalemia
[Ref Morgan Pie p. 214]
Sch can cause dangerous hyperkalemia in and is contraindicated in:
Burn, massive trauma, crush injury, Severe intraabdominal infection
(sepsis).
1713. "Triangle of Petit" is a landmark for
      which block?
 a) Spinal block

 b) Bier's block

 c) TAP block

 d) Epidural block



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. TAP block
[Ref Miller's anesthesia E-book p. 1735]
* Transverse abdominis plane (TAP) block
  - It is a peripheral nerve block designed to anesthetize the nerves
supplying the anterior abdominal wall (T6 to L1).
  - The point of entry for the blind TAP block is the lumbar triangle of
Petit.
  - This is situated between the lower costal margin and iliac crest.
  - It is bound anteriorly by the external oblique muscle and
posteriorly by the latissmis dorsi.
1714. What is the intubation dose of
      pancuronium?
 a) 0.1 mg/kg

 b) 1 mg/kg

 c) 10 mg/kg

 d) 20 mg/kg



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. 0.1 mg/kg
1715. Which of the following agent is
      associated with maximum histamine
      release?
 a) d-Tubocurarine

 b) Cisatracurium

 c) Pancronium

 d) Rocuronium



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. d-Tubocurarine
Histamine release is caused by → D-TC (maximum tendency),
succinylcholine, mivacurium, doxacurium, atracurium, tubocurarine
can cause bronchoconstriction.
1716. Hypotension following spinal
      anesthesia can be best prevented by?
 a) Preloading with colloids

 b) Using small size needle

 c) Preloading with crystalloids

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Preloading with colloids
[Ref Lee 13th/e p. 509, 510; Morgan 4th/e p. 297]
Hypotension is the most common complication of spinal anesthesia.
It arises due to blocking of sympathetic root fibers and is usually
accompanied by bradycardia (Preganglionic block of the
sympathetic nerves to heart T1-T4) and nausea.
Hypotension can be prevented by preloading the patient with
colloids, Preloading with crystalloid does not prevent hypotension
because large volumes of crystalloids quickly redistribute from
intravascular to extravascular space.
Beach chair position also prevents hypotension.
1717. Intra-arterial thiopentone injection
     leads to?
 a) Ischemia

 b) Vasodilatation

 c) Vomiting

 d) Hypertension



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Ischemia
[Ref Ajay Yadav 4th/e p. 80; Lee 13thie p. 155]
Ischemia
Inadvertent intra-arterial injection of thiopentone is a very dreadful
complication.
It produces thrombosis, vasospasm, ischemia, necrosis and finally
gangrene.
The first symptom is burning pain. The first sign is blanching of the
hand due to vasospasm.
1718. Size of LMA for a 15kg child is?
a) 1

b) 2

c) 3

d) 4



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. 2
LMA according to patient’s weight and age:
10-20kgs, infants & children
1719. Anesthetic agent leading to bradycardia
      is?
 a) Pancuronium

 b) Vecuronium

 c) Atracurium

 d) Propofol



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Propofol
Bradycardia causing anesthetic agents:
Succinylcholine
Propofol
Opioids anesthetics (fentanyl and its congers)
1720. Type E circuit is used for?
 a) Spontaneous ventilation

 b) Controlled ventilation

 c) Children

 d) An used for all of the above indications



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Children
[Ref Ajay Yadav 4th/e p. 29, 30]
Circuit of choice for spontaneous ventilation in adult -4 Mapleson A
Circuit of choice for controlled ventilation in adult Mapleson D (Bain
circuit)
Circuit of choice for children - Type F, i.e. Jackson-Rees (first
choice) and type E, i.e. Ayre's T piece (second choice)
1721. Propofol shows following effect on
      EEG?
a) Activation

b) Depression

c) Depression in low doses and activation in high doses

d) None of the above



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Depression
EEG changes during anesthesia:
EEG Depression caused by,
Inhalational agents (1-2 MAC)
Barbiturates
Opioids
Etomidate
Propofol
Hypocapnia
Marked hypercapnia
Hypothermia
Late hypoxia, ischemia
1722. Pin index system is a safety feature
      adopted in anesthesia machines to
      prevent?
 a) Incorrect attachment of anesthesia machines

 b) Incorrect attachment of anesthesia face masks

 c) Incorrect inhalation agent delivery

 d) Incorrect gas cylinder attachment



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Incorrect gas cylinder attachment
[Ref Lee 13th/e p. 85]
Pin index system: - This is the safety mechanism so that one
cylinder cannot be fitted at the other's position.
1723. Anesthetic agent of choice in asthma
      patient is?
 a) Thiopentone

 b) Methexitone

 c) Ketamine

 d) Propofol



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Ketamine
[Ref Miller's 7"le p. 744-746]
Ketamine is a potent bronchodilator; therefore it is the anesthetic
agent of choice in bronchial asthma patients.
Halothane is the inhalational agent of choice in asthmatics.
1724. Mallampatti's classification is for?
 a) Mobility of cervical spine

 b) Mobility of atlanto axial joint

 c) Assessment of free rotation of neck before intubation

 d) Inspection of oral cavity before intubation



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Inspection of oral cavity before intubation
[Ref Morgan 4thie p. 113]
Mallampati score (Mallampati oropharyngeal scale):
Mallampati grading is used to evaluate the visibility of tonsil and
tonsillar fossa which in turn assess the adequate mouth opening
depending upon the grade.
Indications of Mallampati score are Oral cavity assessment to rule
out difficult intubation (Inspection of oral cavity before intubation) &
Sleep apnea evaluation.
1725. Thickness of lead apron to prevent
      radiation:
 a) 1 mm

 b) 3 mm

 c) 0.5 mm

 d) 7 mm



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. 0.5 mm
"It is recommended that for general purpose radiography the minimal
thickness of lead equivalent in the protective apparel should be
0.5mm."
- Textbook of Radiology Physics p. 39
Lead apron of 0.5mm thickness reduce intensity of scattered X-rays
by over 90%.
1726. Radiation protection shields are made
      up of:
 a) Copper

 b) Silver

 c) Lead

 d) Tin



Correct Answer - C
Ans. Lead
1727. Soap bubble appearance on MRI brain
      is characteristic of?
 a) Tubercular meningitis

 b) Neurocysticercosis

 c) Cryptococcal cysts

 d) Ependymoma



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Cryptococcal cysts
Cryptococcomas
T1: low signal
T2 / FLAIR: high signal
T1 C+ (Gd): variable, ranging from no enhancement to peripheral
nodular enhancement.
Gelatinous pseudocysts caused by Cryptococcus tend to give a
"soap bubble" appearance on MRI. MRI findings in neural
cryptococcosis.
1728. T2 image in MRI is -
 a) Good to detect pathology

 b) Good to detect anatomy

 c) Good for both

 d) Good for none



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Good to detect pathology
Many pulse-sequence techniques are used in MRI, but most classic
are T1 and T2 weighted images. As a general rule, TI-weighted
images are good for viewing anatomy, and T2 weighted images are
good for detecting pathology.
[Ref Fundamentals of diagnostic radiology p. 18]
1729. CSF on MRI appears:
a) Hyperintense on T1 weighed image and hypointense on T2
   weighed image

b) Hypointense on T1 weighed image and hyperintense on T2
   weighed image

c) Hyperintense on T1 and T2 weighed images

d) Hypointense on T1 and T2 weighed images



Correct Answer - B
Ans. Hypointense on T1 weighed image and hyperintense on T2
weighed image
Fluid- Edema, Urine, Bile, CSF- T1 weighted signal low & T2
weighted signal high
1730. Keyhole sign on ultrasound is seen in -
 a) Polycystic kidney

 b) Hydronephrosis

 c) Chronic pyelonephritis

 d) Posterior urethral valves



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Posterior urethral valves
The keyhole sign is an ultrasonographic sign seen in boys with
posterior urethral valves. lt refers to the appearance of the proximal
urethra (which is dilated) and associated thick walled distended
bladder which on ultrasound may resemble a key hole.
1731. MIBG dose is -
 a) 40-80MBq

 b) 80-100MBq

 c) 100-120MBq

 d) 120-150MBq



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. 40-80MBq
MIBG scan is a scintigraphic study that uses
metaiodobenzylguanidine labeled to Iodine- 123 or Iodine- 131.
The activity administered to adults should be: for 131I-mIBG: 40-80
MBq (1.2 - 2.2 mCi); for 123ImIBG: 400 MBq (10.8 mCi).
For minimum and maximum recommended activities in children one
should consult the Guidelines for Radioiodinated MIBG
Scintigraphy in Children (minimum activity 20 MBqfor 123I-mIBG
and 35 MBqfor 131I-nIBG; maximum activity 400 MBqfor 123I-mIBG
and 80 MBqfor 131I-mIBG).
  1732. Barium meal follow through is helpful in
        diagnosing -
    a) Colonic stricture

    b) Ileal stricture

    c) Rectal stricture

    d) Esophageal stricture



   Correct Answer - B
   Answer- B. Ileal stricture
   Following abnormalities of small intestine can be identified:-
1. Malabsorption
2. BD (CD & UC)
3. Tumors of small intestine
4. Small bowel obstruction
5. Intestinal strtcture
1733. The maximum permissible level of
      occupational exposure to radiation
      is...per year -
 a) 5 rad

 b) 2 rad.

 c) 10 rad

 d) 50 rad



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is 'a' i.e., 5 Rad
The amount of radiation received from outer space and background
radiation has been estimated to be 0.1 rad a year. Apparently, this
does not at present constitute a hazard. The additional permissible
dose from man made sources should not exceed 5 rad a year.
1734. Banana and lemon sign seen in which
      fetal nomalies :
 a) Neural tube defect

 b) Hydrops fetalis

 c) Twins

 d) IUD



Correct Answer - A
Ans. is a i.e. Neural tube defect
Signs of Spina bifida on Ultrasound
Small biparietal diameter.
Ventriculomegaly.
Frontal bone scalloping or the so called lemon sign.
Elongation and downward displacement of the cerebellum-the so
called banana sign.
Effacement or obliteration of the cisterna megna.
1735. Radiographic sign characteristic of
      pulmonary edema is -
 a) Westermark's sign

 b) Hampton's hump

 c) Palla sign

 d) Bat wing sign



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Bat wing sign
Acute pulmonary edema : - Acute pulmonary edema is characterized
by centrally located alveolar sign, with hazy or fluffy increased
density in perihilar distribution, creating a bat-wing or angel-wing
paftern. There is relative sparing of the more peripheral zones of
lung fields. Air bronchogram become evident as edema becomes
more opaque.
1736. Gamma knife utilizes -
 a) Strontium 89

 b) 1-131

 c) Cobalt -60

 d) P-32



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Cobalt -60
Gamma knife contains Cobalt-60 sources of approximately 30 curis
placed in circular array in a heavily shielded unit. The unit directs the
gamma rirys to the target.
1737. Snow storm appearance on chest X-ray
      is seen in -
 a) Anthracosis

 b) Byssinosis

 c) Silicosis

 d) Bagassosis



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Silicosis
Simple form z- Multiple small rounded (nodular) opacities in the lung
parenchyna (snow stonn appeoraace).
These nodules tend to be located predominantly in the middle and
upper lung fields with relative sparing of lower lung fields (Though
Iower lung fields can also be involved later in disease process).
There is bilateral hilar lymphadenopathy with characteristic egg shell
calcification.
1738. "Droop lily sign" is seen in -
 a) "Droop lily sign" is seen in

 b) Duplicated collecting system

 c) Chronic pyelonephritis

 d) Hypernephroma



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. Duplicated collecting system
The drooping lily srgl (dropping flower sign) is a urographic sign in
some patients with a duplicated collecting system. It refers to the
inferolateral displacement of the opacified lower pole moiety due to
an obstructed (and unopacified) upper pole moeity.
1739. Sonographic appearance of hydatid
      cyst is -
 a) Hyperechoic aseptate lesion

 b) Hypoechoic aseptate lesion

 c) Hyperechoic septate lesion

 d) Hypoechoic septate lesion



Correct Answer - D
Answer- D. Hypoechoic septate lesion
Type I (Simple cyst):- Single (solitary) hnrcechoic/anechoic aseptate
(without septa) lesion. The diagnosis of hydatid cyst may be
considered when focal thickening of wall is present or when
hlperechoic spots, due to hydatid sand, appear in the dependent
areas.
1740. Roentgen is the unit of:
      March 2010
 a) Radioactivity

 b) Radiation exposure

 c) Absorbed dose

 d) None of the above



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B: Radiation Exposure
The curie, named after scientist Marie Curie, is a unit of
measurement used to measure how radioactive an object is, or how
much radiation it produces.
This is done by examining how fast its atoms disintegrate and
measuring their disintegration per second.
Roentgen, on the other hand, is a radiation unit that indicates
how much radiation is present in the air of a specific
environment.
This is used to show how much radiation may be absorbed by
standing in a particular place for a certain amount of time. One
roentgen of gamma- or X-ray exposure produces approximately 1
rad (0.01 gray) tissue dose.
More common than these two are the rad and the rem.
These two units can measure any type of ionizing radiation,
including alpha, beta, neutron, gamma and "X," and deal with how
much radiation is absorbed by objects.
Rad stands for "radiation absorbed dose."
One rad equals 100 ergs (an energy unit) absorbed by 1 g of
material.
Rads are used to show how much radiation any object,
especially things like metal and stone, has absorbed. Rem (dose
equivalent)is a strictly biological measurement, and stands for
"roentgen equivalent man," meaning that it is the same essential
measurement as a roentgen, only applied to the human body,
although this works only with gamma and "X" types of radiation.
Rem is used to define limits of exposure for people who work in
nuclear power plants.
Rem is often divided in millirems and assigned a length of time, such
as millirems per hour.
Curie/ becquerel is the unit of radioactivity.
1741. SI unit of radioactivity is:
      March 2013 (c, f)
 a) Rem

 b) Rad

 c) Becuerel

 d) Curie

 e) None



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C i.e. Becquerel
Old unit of radioactivity is Curie and new unit (SI) is Becquerel.
1742. SI unit of absorbed dose is -
 a) Becquerel

 b) Columb/cm

 c) Gray

 d) Sievert [Sv]



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Gray
Old unit of absorbed dose is Rad and new unit (SI) is Gray.
1743. Stenver's view is used for -
 a) Superior orbital foramen

 b) Inferior orbital foramen

 c) Internal auditory canal

 d) Sella turcica



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Internal auditory canal
Skull trauma (sella turcica) (pituitary fossa)- Lateral view
Internal auditory view (both side)- Stenver's view
1744. Acute myocarditis schintigraphy is
      done with -
 a) Thallium

 b) Technetium

 c) Gallium

 d) None



Correct Answer - C
Answer- C. Gallium
Gallium-67 uptake is increased in inflamed myocardium. Gallium-67
citrate injected intravenously binds to transferrin, and it is
incorporated into the transferrin receptor of inflammatory cells or
malignant tumor cells.
Gallium-67 scintigraphy is useful for examination of heart disease
including cardiac sarcoidosis and acute myocarditis
1745. Radiation used most commonly for pain
      management due to bone metastasis is
      -
 a) Co60

 b) Iridium 192

 c) Tritium

 d) Tin-117



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Co60
Radiopharmaceuticals (radioactive isotopes) used for metastatic
bone pain are strontium (Sr89), Samarium (Sm153), rhenium
(Re186), Phosphorus-32 and Tin-117 (Sn-177).
1746. Minimum radiation dose which may
      lead to oligospermia is -
 a) <1 Gy

 b) 2-3 Gy

 c) 7-10 Gy

 d) 15 Gy



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. <1 Gy
Fractionated doses 0.7-0.9 Gy lead to oligospermia/azoospermia but
with frequent recovery at 1-1.5 years. Permanent azoospermia may
occur after fractionated doses as low as 1.2 Gy, and is likely >2 Gy.
1747. Half life of Technetium 99 is:
 a) 2 hours

 b) 6 hours

 c) 12 hours

 d) 24 hours



Correct Answer - B
Ans. 6 hours
Tc-99 -              Technitium     -              6 hours
Half life (tin) of radium (Ra226)is 1602-1626 years (longest)Q;
Cesium (137Cs) is 30 yearsQ; Cobalt (60Co)
is 5.2 yearsQ; iridium (1921r)is 74.5 daysQ; Iodine (P31)is 8
daysQ; 1123 is 13 hoursQ; technitium (Tc99) is 6 hoursQ; and
1132 is 2.3 hoursQ.
1748. Half life of tritium is -
 a) 10.2 years

 b) 12.3 years

 c) 15.5 years

 d) 20.7 years



Correct Answer - B
Answer- B. 12.3 years
Tritium (hydrogen-3) is a radioactive isotope of hydrogen. The
nucleus of tritium (sometimes called a triton) contains one proton
and two neutrons.
Whereas the nucleus of protium contains one proton and no
neutrons.
Tritium has a half-life of 12.3 years
   1749. Stereotactic radiosurgery is done for -
    a) Glioblastoma multiforme

    b) Medulloblastoma spinal cord

    c) Ependymoma

    d) AV malformation of brain



   Correct Answer - D
   Ans. is 'D' i.e., AV malformation of brain
   It is also used for-
1. Solitary cerebral metastasis
2. Arteriovenous malformation
3. Small meningiomas
4. Schwannomas
5. Pituitary adenomas
1750. A Bone marrow transplant recipient
      patientdeveloped chest infection. On
      HRCT 'Tree in bud appearance' is seen.
      Most likely causative agent is:
 a) Klebsiella

 b) Pneumocystis

 c) TB

 d) RSV



Correct Answer - B
Pneumocystis [Ref: Harrison I7/e p843; Article 'Tree in bud sign' in
Journal 'Radiology' and 'Radiographics7
Tree-in-bud is a sign seen in HRCT, most commonly seen with
endobronchial spread of Tuberculosis, but can be seen with a wide
variety of conditions, most commonly infections. (Described ahead in
detail).
Theoretically all the options can cause 'Tree-in-bud' sign (although
Klebsiella has not been mentioned in the list).
So the next clue is Bone marrow transplant.
Bone marrow transplant causes a transient state of immunological
deficiency leading to a wide variety of opportunistic infections.
Among the given options, according to the table and text of Harrison
(17/e chapter 'Infections in Transplant Recipients') Pneumocystis
and RSV can cause pneumonia after transplant: but​Pneumocystis is
a much more common than RSV.
Common Sources of Infections after Hematopoietic Stein Cell
Transplantation
                  Period after Transplantation
             Early (<1      Middle (1-4
Infection Site                                 Late (>6 Months)
             Month)         months)
Disseminated Aerobic gram- Nocardia            Encapsulated
             negative,      Candida,           bacteria
             grain-positive Aspergillus        (Streptococcus
             bacteria                          pneumoniae,
                                               Haemophilus
                                               influenzae,
                                               Neisseria
                                               meningitidis)
Skin and           HSV-          HHV-6         VZV
mucous
membranes
Lungs              Candida,      CMV,         Pneumocystis
                   Aspergillus   seasonal
                   HSV           respiratory
                                 viruses
                                 Pneumocystis
                                 Toxoplasma
Gastrointestinal
                                 CMV
tract
                                 BK virus,
Kidney                                         BK virus
                                 adenovirus
Brain              HHV-6         Toxoplasma    Toxoplasma
                                               JC virus
Bone marrow HHV-6
Tree-in-bud sign
The tree-in-bud sign is a finding seen on thin-section computed
tomographic images of the lung (HRCT). (Not seen on X-rays)
Peripheral, small, centrilobular nodules are connected to linear,
branching opacities that have more than one contiguous branching
site, thus resembling a budding or, fruiting tree: this is known as
tree-in-bud-pattern.
It represents dilated and impacted (mucus or pus-filled) centrilobular
bronchioles. The presence of tree-in-bud is indicative of small airway
disease.
It is most commonly associated with endobronchial spread of
Mycobacterium tuberculosis. But it can also be seen in a large
number of conditions.
Pulmonary infectious disorders involving the small airways are the
most common causes of the tree-in-bud sign. Any infectious
organism, including bacterial, mycobacterial, viral, parasitic, and
fungal agents, can involve the small airways and cause a tree-in-bud
pattern.
Causes of Tree-in-bud appearance
                             Congenital
                             disorders
Peripheral airway disease Cystic fibrosis
                                                 Connective tissue
Infection                    Kartagener
                                                 disorders
Bacterial                    syndrome
                                                 Rheumatoid arthritis
Mycobacterium                Idiopathic
                                                 Sjo-gren syndrome
tuberculosis                 disorders
                                                 Peripheral
M avium-intracellulare       Obliterative
                                                 pulmonary vascular
complex                      bronchiolitis
                                                 disease
Staphylococcus aureus        Diffuse
                                                 Neoplasms
Haemophilus                  panbronchiolitis
                                                 Primary pulmonary
influenzae                   A
                                                 lymphoma
Fungal                       spiration
                                                 Neoplastic
Aspergillus                  Inhalation
                                                 pulmonary emboli
Pneumocystis carinii,        Toxic fumes and
                                                 Gastric cancer
(renamed Pneumocystis gases
                                                 Breast cancer
jiroveci) Viral              Immunologic
                                                 Ewing sarcoma
Cytomegalovirus              disorders
                                                 Renal cancer
 Respiratory syncytial virus Allergic
                             bronchopulmonary
                             aspergillosis
1751. Safe light in radiographic dark room is
      ideally should be of following color -
 a) Red

 b) Yellow

 c) Purple

 d) Blue



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Red
Red- Some blue sensitive materials, most phototypesetting
materials, most blue and most green sensitive medical x-ray films
(used in darkroom).
Dark amber- Color negative papers and materials, panchromatic
black and white papers.
Amber- Color negative papers, panchromatic black and white papers
1752. Chain of lakes appearance is seen in?
 a) Chronic pancreatitis

 b) Acute pancreatitis

 c) Gall stone ileus

 d) Sub-acute intestinal obstruction



Correct Answer - A
Chronic pancreatitis REF: Sutton's Radiology 7th edition volume 1
page 798, Sabiston textbook of surgery 18th ed chapter 5
Chronic pancreatitis is characterized by irregularities of the
pancreatic ducts, ductal strictures, and areas of duct dilation. The
major as well as the side-branch ducts may be involved. For
unexplained reasons, some patients with chronic pancreatitis
develop dilated main pancreatic ducts (large duct disease), whereas
others retain ducts of normal or even smaller than normal caliber
(small duct disease). Some patients with chronic pancreatitis can be
shown to have major ducts that have the appearance of a "chain of
lakes" or a "string of pearls" that is the result of segments of dilated
duct separated by areas of ductal stricture
1753. Commonly used type of radiation in
      radiotherapy is:
 a) Alpha rays

 b) Beta rays

 c) Gamma rays

 d) X-rays



Correct Answer - C
Ans. Gamma rays
Radioiodine generates both beta and gamma rays but predominantly
beta rays.
1754. The photosensitive material used in X-
      rays films consist of:
 a) Cellulose

 b) Silver bromide

 c) Zinc sulphide

 d) Cadmium tungstate



Correct Answer - B
Ans. Silver bromide
After the image has been developed, the resultant image is then
fixed by a fixer (Hypo-sodium thiosulphate) which removes unused
silver halide, which would make the film appear milky or cloudy. X-
ray film should be developed in dark room, otherwise light will spoil
the film (x-ray film has photosensitive silver bromide). Blue and
green light are most sensitive whereas yellow and red light are least.
1755. Least penetrating power among
      following mentioned rays is in -
 a) Alpha rays

 b) Beta rays

 c) Gamma rays

 d) X-ray



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. Alpha rays
Penetration power : Gamma rays> X rays > Beta particle > Alpha
particle (or helium ion)
Ionizing & damaging power : Alpha particle (or helium ion) > Beta
particle > X ray> Gamma ray
Alpha particles (Helium nuclei) have highest ionizing power because
they have a large charge.
Alpha particles have the highest damaging power as they are
relatively slow and heavy.
1756. Non - ionizing radiation among the
      following is -
 a) MRI

 b) CT Scan

 c) X-ray

 d) Position emission scintigraphy



Correct Answer - A
Answer- A. MRI
Non- ionizing radiation-
USG
MRI
Thermography (infrared rays)
UV rays
Radiofrequency waves
Microwaves
1757. Confabulation is?
 a) A state of confusion where patient is not able to describe the
    details

 b) Purposefully fabricating stories to project a certain image

 c) Filling up to gaps by fabrication to cover lapses in memory

 d) A feeling of strangeness to familiar situations or events.



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Filling up to gaps by fabrication to cover lapses in
memory
[Ref Kaplan & Sadock's 10th/e p. 275]
Confabulation
It is a type of Paramnesia (Distorted or falsified recall of events in
relation to details or their temporal relationships)
Unintentional filling of gaps of memory with material which are
untrue and fanciful.
1758. Alcohol withdrawal is not associated
      with?
 a) Seizure

 b) Amnesia

 c) Tremers

 d) Delirium



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Amnesia
[Ref: Niraj Ahuja 6th/e p. 41]
Amnesia occurs during acute intoxication (not during withdrawal).
  1759. A 40 year old married male thinks that
        he is multitalented and is always
        overconfident. He never listens to his
        family or friends. Infact whenever
        anyone gives him any advice, he thinks
        that they have some motive against
        him. He is always suspicious of his
        wife.
        All these are feature of?
    a) Borderline personality disorder

    b) Schizoid personality disorder

    c) Paranoid personality disorder

    d) Histrionic personality disorder



   Correct Answer - C
   Ans. C. Paranoid personality disorder
   [Ref Namboodiri 3rdle p. 303; Niraj Ahuja ele p. 123]
   Paranoid personality disorder:
    It is characterized by generalized mistrust and suspiciousness
   about the motives and actions of others and a tendency to interpret
   them as malevolent. The patient believes that:
1. Others are exploiting or deceiving the person.
2. Friends are untrustworthy and not loyal.
3. The spouse/partner is unfaithful.
4. There is hidden meaning in neutral or friendly remarks.
5. Many patients have feeling of self-importance and think they are
unusually talented.
1760. Characteristic of histrionic personality
      disorder is?
 a) Violation of rules of society

 b) Attention - seeking behavior

 c) Unstable interpersonal relationship

 d) Grandiose behavior



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Attention - seeking behavior
[Ref Niraj Ahuja 6'"/e p. 122]
Patients with histrionic personality disorder display excessive
emotionality and attention-seeking behavior. Other options
Violation of rules of society → antisocial personality disorder
Unstable interpersonal relationship → borderline personality disorder
Grandiose behavior → narcissistic personality disorder
1761. Personality type seen in schizophrenia
      is?
 a) Schizoid

 b) Paranoid

 c) Borderline

 d) All of the above



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. All of the above
[Ref Niraj Ahuja 6th/e p. 125 & Internet]
Schizophrenia is associated with 3 types of personality disorders i.e.
schizoid, borderline and paranoid.
1762. Irresistible urge to drink alcohol is
      called?
 a) Kleptomania

 b) Pyromania

 c) Dipsomania

 d) Trichotillomania



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Dipsomania
[Ref Peculiarities of behavior]
Dipsomania is characterized by periodic bouts of uncontrollable
craving for alcohol.
1763. A 39 years old male patient presents
      with waxy flexibility, negativism and
      rigidity. Most probable diagnosis is?
 a) Excitatory catatonia

 b) Stuporous catatonia

 c) Paranoid schizophrenia

 d) None



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Stuporous catatonia
[Ref Neeraj Ahuja &hie p. 62, 63]
Stuporous (retarded) catatonia :
Characterized by extreme retardation of psychomotor function,
which includes mutism, rigidity, negativism, posturing, echolalia,
Echopraxia, Catalepsy (waxy flexibility), ambitendency, gegenhalten,
streotypies, stupor, Mannerism, Grimicing, Automatic obedience,
and verbigeration.
1764. Most appropriate test for child
      psychologist to evaluate the intellectual
      ability of a 3 year old is?
 a) Stanford Binet scale

 b) Denver development scale

 c) Alexander's pass along test

 d) Rorschach inkblot test



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Stanford Binet scale
[Ref Psychological testing p. 101]
Stanford-Binet Intelligence Scale
The Stanford-Binet Intelligence Scale is an individually administered
standardized test that measures intelligence and cognitive abilities in
children and adults, from age two through mature adulthood.
The Stanford-Binet Intelligence Scale is now in its fifth edition (SB5)
and was released in 2003. It is a cognitive ability and intelligence
test that is used to diagnose developmental or intellectual
deficiencies in young children.
1765. Treatment of choice for akathesia is?
 a) Phenytoin

 b) Propranolol

 c) Dantrolene

 d) Lithium



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Propranolol
[Ref Kaplan & Saddock's 10th le p. 1020]
"The first line drug for akathisia is most commonly alpha-blocker".
1766. Cardinal element of behavior therapy
      is?
 a) Modeling

 b) Learning

 c) Conditioning

 d) Guidance



Correct Answer - B
Ans.B. Learning
[Ref Niraj Ahuja 6'1* p. 220]
Behavior therapy is based on the assumption that all behaviors
(normal or abnormal) are learning response. Normal and abnormal
behaviors are subject to the laws of learning and the same laws can
be used to change them. Behavior therapy is based on theories of
learning and aims at changing the maladaptive behavior and
substituting it with adaptive behavior.
   1767. Tolerance is seen in?
    a) Alcohol dependent syndrome

    b) Schizophrenia

    c) OCD

    d) All of the above



   Correct Answer - A
   Ans. A. Alcohol dependent syndrome
   [Ref Kaplan & Saddock's 10thle p. 382]
   Alcohol dependent syndrome
   Alcohol dependent syndrome uses the same criteria for dependence
   for other substances, i.e., three or more of the following : -
1. Tolerance
2. Withdrawal symptoms
3. Alcohol is taken in larger amount or for longer period.
4. Persistent desire or sense of compulsion to take alcohol.
5. A great deal of time spent to obtain alcohol, to use alcohol or to
   recover from its effect.
6. Neglect of important social, occupational and recreational activities.
1768. Treatment of choice for generalized
      anxiety disorder is?
 a) Benzodiazepines

 b) Neuroleptics

 c) Beta blockers

 d) Barbiturates



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Benzodiazepines
[Ref Harrison 17th/e p. 2712; Kaplan & Saddock's 10th/e p. 626]
Treatment of generalized anxiety disorder
Benzodiazepines are the drug of choice. Drugs in this group are
diazepam, Lorazepam, Alprazolam, Oxazepam, chlordiazepoxide.
1769. Generalized anxiety disorder is
      diagnosed when anxiety and worry
      continues for at least?
 a) 2 months

 b) 4 months

 c) 6 months

 d) 8 months



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. 6 months
[Ref Harrison 17"/e p. 2712; Kaplan & Saddock's 10th/e p. 626]
GENERALIZED ANXIETY DISORDER
This is characterized by excessive anxiety and worry which are
persistent & generalized and not restricted to any specific situation
or object.
Excessive anxiety worry occur for at least 6 months.
1770. Risk factor for suicide is?
 a) Increased serotonin

 b) Drug abuse

 c) Female sex

 d) Married person



Correct Answer - B
Ans.B. Drug abuse
[Ref: Niraj Ahuja ele p. 236, 237; Essentials of psychiatry 4th/e p.
734]
Causes/Risk factors for suicide
Psychiatric disorders: - Depression (most common), alcoholism (2nd
mc), Drug/Substance dependence, Schizophrenia, Dementia.
Physical illness: - Cancer, AIDS, Multiple sclerosis, Head trauma.
Psychosocial factors: - Failure in love, marital difficulties, family
dispute, illegitimate pregnancy.
Biological factors: - Decrease in serotonin
Other - Male sex, Age > 40 years, Single (Unmarried, divorced or
widowed), previous suicide attempt, social isolation.
1771. A 25 years old male c/o recurrent
      abdominal pain but biochemical assays
      and ultrasound abdomen is normal. He
      also complains of constant headaches.
      He suddenly complains of loss of vision
      of bilateral eyes. Ophthalmologist finds
      nothing on examination. Symptoms are
      most probably due to
 a) Bilateral optic neuritis

 b) Posterior inferior cerebellar artery infarct

 c) Malingering

 d) Factitious disorder



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Factitious disorder
Factitious disorder
It is also known as Hospital addiction, hospital hoboes, or
Professional patient.
The term Munchausen syndrome is used for those patients who
repeatedly simulate or fake diseases (intentionally) for the sole
purpose of obtaining medical attention. There is no other
recognizable motive (in contrast to malingering).
The typical presentation of Munchausen syndrome is characterized
by a restless journey from doctor to doctor and hospital to hospital,
an ever-changing list of complaints and symptoms.
The patient tries to maintain the sick role to obtain medical attention.
There may be evidence of earlier treatment usually surgical
procedure, for example, multiple surgical scars (gridiron abdomen).
  1772. Most important receptors involved with
        schizophrenia are?
    a) GABAA


    b) GABA,,

    c) DZd


    d) 5-HT



   Correct Answer - C
   Ans. C. DZd
   [Ref Kaplan & Saddock's 10th le p. 470]
   Dopamine hypothesis is the most accepted hypothesis for
   schizophrenia. There is hyperactivity of dopaminergic system. This
   hypothesis is supported by :
1. Amphetamine and cocaine which release dopamine in central
   synapses induce schizophrenia like symptoms; and
2. Antipsychotic drugs control the schizophrenic symptoms by blocking
   dopamine (D2) receptors.
1773. Functional somatic disorder is?
 a) Somatization disorder

 b) Chronic fatigue syndrome

 c) Hypochondriasis

 d) Body dysmorphic disorder



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Chronic fatigue syndrome
Functional somatic syndromes:
They are characterized more by symptoms, suffering and disability
than by disease specific, demonstrable abnormalities of structure or
function, i.e. There is reporting of somatic symptoms and resultant
disability rather than on the evidence of underlying convention
disease process
Three most common functional somatic syndromes are fibromyalgia,
Irritable bowel syndrome and chronic fatigue syndrome.
1774. DHAT syndrome is?
 a) Passage of blood in urine

 b) Passage of semen in urine

 c) Passage of pus in urine

 d) None



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Passage of semen in urine
[Ref Encyclopedia of multicultural psychology p. 135]
Dhat syndrome is a culture-bound syndrome prevalent in Indian
subcontinent in which male patients report that they suffer from
premature ejaculation or impotence, and believe that they are
passage of semen (dhat) in urine.
The condition has no known organic cause.
1775. Suicide rate in India is?
 a) 10.5 /100,000

 b) 12.5/ 100,000

 c) 14.5/ 100,000

 d) 18/ 100,000



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. 10.5 /100,000
[Ref Internet; Indian 1 Psychiatry. 2012 Oct-Dec; 54(4): 304-
319.doi:10.4103/0019-5545.104793]
India ranks 43rd in descending order of rates of suicide with a rate of
10.6/100,000 reported in 2009 (WHO suicide rates).
In the most recent National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB; Ministry
of Home Affairs) report the rate in 2010 rose to 11.4 per 100,000
population.
The male: female suicide ratio was 1.78 in India in 2008 and 2009.
1776. Which of the following is not a culture
      bound syndrome?
a) Amok

b) Latah

c) Dhat

d) Von-Gogh



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. Von-Gogh
[Ref Niraj Ahuja 6'/e p. 65]
Important culture-bound syndromes
Ataque de nervios
Dhat syndrome
Khyal cap
Ghost sickness
Kufungisisa
Maladi moun
Nervios
Shenjing shuairuo
Taijin kyofusho
Susto
Amok
Koro
Latah
Windigo
1777. A 25 years old male is not happy with
      its gender and is always in distress due
      to this. He wants to change sex and
      have vagina. It comes under?
 a) Transsexualism

 b) Dual role transvestism

 c) Gender dysphoria

 d) Sexual maturation



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Gender dysphoria
[Ref Encyclopedia of relationships across the life span p.191]
* Gender dysphoria (formerly Gender Identity Disorder)
  - It is defined by strong, persistent feelings of identification with the
opposite gender and discomforts with one's own assigned sex that
results in significant distress or impairment.
  - In these cases, the assigned sex and gender do not match the
person's gender identity, and the person is transgender.
1778. Scatologia is?
 a) Eating disorder

 b) Sleep disorder

 c) Paraphilia

 d) Defense mechanism



Correct Answer - C
Ans. C. Paraphilia
[Ref: Niraj Ahuja 6th/e p. 133, 134]
Scatologia, also called Coprolalia, is a deviant sexual practice in
which sexual pleasure is obtained through the compulsive use of
obscene language.
The affected person commonly satisfies his desires through obscene
telephone calls, usually to strangers.
1779. Drug of choice for Tourette syndrome
      is?
 a) Haloperidol

 b) Amantidine

 c) Propanolol

 d) Diazepam



Correct Answer - A
Ans. A. Haloperidol
[Ref Kaplan & Saddock 10`Ve p. 557]
Medication for tic suppression (Tourrete syndrome)
Neuroleptics - Pimozide, along with haloperidol and fluphenazine are
the medications with the most proven efficacy in controlling tics.
1780. Loading dose of diazepam for alcohol
      withdrawal is?
 a) 80mg

 b) 50mg

 c) 40mg

 d) 20mg



Correct Answer - D
Ans. D. 20mg
Rigid:
10 mg four times daily
Flexible:
10 mg every 4-6 hours asneeded based on symptoms to a
maximum of 60 mg/day
Front loading:
20 mg every 2-4 hours until sedation is achieved; then 10 mg every
4-6 hours as needed to a maximum of 60 mg/day
  1781. TCAs are contraindicated in all of the
                 following except?
    a) Narrow angle glaucoma

    b) Prostate hypertrophy

    c) A patient on MOA inhibitors

    d) Impaired renal function



   Correct Answer - D
   Ans. D. Impaired renal function
   [Ref Lippincott p. 81]
   Common Contraindications of TCAs
1. Hypersensitivity to the medicines
2. Cardiac conduction abnormalities
3. Within 14 days of MAO inhibitors
4. Urinary retention
5. Narrow angle glaucoma
6. Prostate enlargement
7. Should be used cautiously in suicidal tendency, schizophrenia,
   seizure disorders, paranoia, impaired liver functions.
8. Safety in not established in pregnancy and lactation. Not
   recommended for children less 12years of age.
1782. DOC for schizophrenic patient with
      poor oral absorption is?
 a) Clozapine

 b) Fluphenazine

 c) Sulpride

 d) Penfluridol



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Fluphenazine
[Ref: Ther Adv Psychopharmacol. 2014 Oct; 4(5): 198-219.doi:
10.1177/2045125314540297]
Long-acting injectable (LAI) antipsychotics (APs) (LAI APs) have
proved effective in schizophrenia and other severe psychotic
disorders because they assure stable blood levels, leading to a
reduction of the risk of relapse.
LAIs bypass the initial deactivating process by avoiding first-pass
metabolism in the liver.
1783.       Which of the following is not a side
                  effect of quetiapine?
 a) Dry mouth

 b) Hair loss

 c) Sudden cardiac death

 d) Dyspepsia



Correct Answer - B
Ans. B. Hair loss
[Ref Goodman & Gilman li'Ve p. 463-466]
Quetiapine is an atypical antipsychotic used for the treatment of
schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, and major depressive disorder.
Very Common Less common                  Rare
Dry mouth       High blood pressure      Prolonged QT interval
                Orthostatic
Dizziness                                Sudden cardiac death
                hypotension
Headache        High blood cholesterol Syncope
                Elevated serum
Somnolence                               Diabetic ketoacidosis
                triglycerides
Nausea          Abdominal pain           Restless legs syndrome
                                         Hyponatraemia, low blood
Vomiting        Constipation
                                         sodium.
Increased
                Increased appetite       Jaundice
appetite
                Increased liver
Sore throat                              Pancreatitis
                enzymes
Trouble
                Backache                 Agranulocytosis
moving
Rapid
Rapid
                 Insomnia           Seizure
heartbeat
Weakness         Fatigue            Cardiomyopathy
                 Pain               Suicidal ideation
                 Dyspepsia
                                    Priapism
                 (Indigestion)
                                    Neuroleptic malignant
                 Peripheral edema
                                    syndrome
                 Dysphagia          Tardive Dyskinesia.
                 Weight gain


invalid question id
